SA overcoming HIV and Aids
Vukuzenzele Unnamed
As we continue our efforts to manage the devastating Coronavirus pandemic, we cannot ignore the other public health challenges that our country faces.
For more than three dec ades, our country has been engaged in an ongoing struggle against HIV and AIDS, which has cost many lives and caused great hardship and suffering.
Since the outbreak of COV ID-19 in the country, with the nation-wide lockdown and the pressure on our health facilities, many HIV , AIDS and tuberculosis services have suffered.
This has posed a challenge for people testing and starting antiretroviral treatment.
Many people found it difficult to collect their medicines and fewer people accessed other services, such as voluntary male medical circumcision.
At the same time, there are many lessons that have been learnt from our public health response to the coronavirus pandemic that can strengthen our fight against HIV and TB.
South Africa continues to have the largest number of people living with HIV in the world.
It is encouraging, however, that over the last decade we made progress in reducing the number of new HIV infections in the population by nearly 60%.It is also encouraging that HIV infections in adolescent girls and young women have significantly declined in the last decade.
This is a crucial group because they are much more likely to be at risk of getting HIV .Our treatment programme has contributed to a reduction in the number of deaths due to AIDS by 60%.
There has been a greater reduction in HIV-related deaths among young people.
It was possible to reduce the number of deaths because we, together with our partners, have rolled out an extensive antiretroviral programme reaching millions of people living with the disease.
At the beginning of the decade, our programme to prevent mother to child transmission (PMTCT) of HIV had very low coverage.
Now we have one of the highest rates of coverage of PMTCT in Southern Africa, which has substantially reduced rates of infection among children.While we have reduced deaths and new infections, we still are far from reaching the goal we committed ourselves in 2016 of achieving a 75% reduction in HIV infections by 2020.
If we succeed in doing so, we are likely to end AIDS as a public health threat by 2030.Unfortunately, we are not there yet.
We have to do far more to ensure that young people are empowered to prevent infections, including through changing behaviour, accessing condoms and testing regularly.
We need to make sure that everyone who is infected has access to treatment and care.We need to work harder on HIV prevention among key populations, including sex workers, men who have sex with men, and people who inject drugs.
We must end the stigma and discrimination towards these populations.
We cannot hope to end HIV if we ignore the needs, concerns and rights of any part of our population.South Africa needs to increase efforts to medically circumcise young men to reduce their risk of acquiring HIV .
Unsafe circumcision should not leave young men with lifelong health problems, and no one should die from circumcision.
We must make sure that young men have safe circumcision.We are encouraged by findings of a recent study on pre-exposure prophylaxis (PrEP).
Unlike antiretroviral treatment that is given to people who are HIV positive, PrEP involves the regular use of antiretroviral drugs by HIV negative people to prevention infection.
The study, conducted by scientists from the HIV Prevention Trials Network, found that long-acting injections once every eight weeks was better than the daily tablet used for HIV prevention.
These findings have the potential to significantly strengthen our response to the epidemic.If we are to succeed in ending AIDS as a public health threat within the next decade, we need to combine these medical breakthroughs with fundamental changes in behaviour.
We also need to tackle the economic and social conditions that contrib ute to high rates of infection.
One of our central tasks is to empower adolescent girls and young women, educationally, economically and socially.
They need to be able to make their own decisions about every aspect of their lives, including their sexuality and sexual behaviour.Ultimately, we will achieve the end of AIDS through the empowerment of young people, women and other people at risk.
This includes empowerment through access to information, advice and support.
It includes access to education and economic opportunities, especially for young women.
Empowerment also means that every person must have access to testing, treatment and other health services.
The people of South Africa have come so far, endured so much and made such great progress in the fight against HIV , AIDS and Tuberculosis.
Let us intensify both our resolve and our actions to confront and overcome AIDS once and for all.
Another chance to get your matric
Cathy Grosvenor
It is never too late to get your matric or to achieve the results you want, is the message behind the Department of Basic Edu cation’s (DBE) Second Chance Matric Support Programme.
Director of the programme, Dr Sandy Malapile, says a matric qualification is an absolute necessity because without it, many doors of opportunity remain closed.
“Sector Training and Edu-cation Authorities (SETAs), tasked with upskilling the nation through skills programmes and appren-ticeships, also require that candidates have a matric,” says Dr Malapile.Launched in January 2016, the Second Chance pro-gramme supports anyone – of any age – who wants to achieve or improve a matric qualification, subject-by-sub-ject and on a part-time basis.
There are no costs involved.
Who qualifies?
• People who want to im prove their matric results, whether they wrote matric recently or even decades ago.
Dr Malapile explains that a person wanting to obtain an engineering qualification, for in stance, might need to im prove their mathematics mark to qualify for the course.
• People who failed matric and want a second chance at passing.• People who left school after passing Grade 9 (then Standard 7), are 21 or older, and wish to obtain their matric.
How to get startedRegister at one of the 75 dis trict education offices across the country or online at this website: www.eservices.gov.za.Registration opened on 1 October and will close in February 2021.
Learners either study on their own or at one of the 133 Second Chance centres where face-to-face learning takes place after-hours and on weekends.
Dr Malapile says only the top performing teachers in each district are employed at these centres.
The centres are not available in every town and village, but are located in areas where the greatest number of people have registered, which means their location could change each year.Both face-to-face learners and learners who study at home have access to a full range of study support services, from lessons broadcast on radio and television at specific times; to downloadable online material; and, for those without access to computers, printers and the inter net−printed study material is sent to them by the DBE.
People with a computer but no internet or data, may request a CD with all the study material, which will be mailed to them.“Many adult learners may not have lots of time to devote to their studies.
Luck ily, they may decide how many subjects they want to do a year because they do not have to complete their matric within a set time.”Once registered, the DBE will help each older learner choose the subjects they want to do and explain which ones are compulsory.
On qualifying, people who left school after 2008 receive a National Senior Certificate and those who left school earlier, receive an Amended Senior Certificate.
However, Dr Malapile says both qualifications carry the same weight and, depending on the subjects taken and marks achieved, can be used to apply to universities and colleges.
Giving second chancesThe DBE holds community roadshows to encourage people to enrol for the Second Chance programme.
Tertiary education institutions and SETAs are invited to provide as much information as possible to interested people.At many of these roadshows, Minister Angie Mot shekga was asked by youth to introduce programmes that could assist young people to be more employable, says Dr Malapile.
In response, the DBE is launching a skills development programme this year that will target about 3.4 million young people who are not in employment, education or training.
Courses will range from life skills – covering topics such as how to write a CV and what to do at a job interview; to basic skills courses, such as shoe repair, basic ITC and literacy.Did you know?
• Regardless of whether you left school in the 60s or recently, you have to study the current curriculum.
• The South African education system also caters for people who dropped out before Grade Nine, through the Department of Higher Education and Training’s adult basic education and training programme.
Presidential Employment Stimulus drives job creation
vukuzenzele unnamed
The recent launch of the second phase of the Presidential Employment Stimulus represents great progress in our quest to create job opportunities for unemployed South Africans.
We established the employment stimulus last year to create as many opportunities as possible in the shortest possible time.
This required new and innovative ways of working to implement programmes at an unprecedented speed and scale.The recruitment process of the many people who were unemployed made use of digital platforms to reach as many eligible participants as possible.
For example, small-scale farmers were able to apply for support via USSD and receive input vouchers to their cellphones.Since the Department of Basic Education opened applications for the next cohort of school assistants recently, over 940 000 young people have applied via the zero-rated recruitment platform called SAYouth.mobi, which forms part of the national Pathway Management Network.The use of new technologies in offering employment opportunities has made recruitment much easier, quicker and more transparent.The Presidential Employment Stimulus has enabled and facilitated cooperation in the public sector.
Programmes in phase one were implemented by 11 national departments.
Their activities were aligned to avoid duplication and wastage and enhance learning from the experience of others.The employment stimulus has also shown the importance of social partnership.
Government, business, labour and civil society have come together to bring those who are unemployed into the economy.More than half a million South Africans have already benefitted from the first phase, with several programmes still underway.
Participants were given the opportunity to earn a livelihood, to learn new skills and upgrade existing ones, and to use their experience as a springboard to get another job or to self-employment.For example, a number of participants appointed by the Department of Public Works and Infrastructure in its phase one programmes were able to secure private sector employment by the end of March 2021.
Many of those in the first cohort of school assistants, similarly, have found their way into employment, armed with experience, training and references.The programmes implemented through the Presidential Employment Stimulus have also benefited communities more broadly.
The focus has been on job creation in sectors with direct social impact such as education, food security, public infrastructure maintenance and environmental protection.Through this Presidential Employment Stimulus young people were employed to support and assist teachers in our schools.
Others were employed to build bridges in rural communities.
Many Early Childhood Development Centres were helped to survive and reopen.
Subsistence farmers were supported to expand production, and environ-mental assets such as rivers and wetlands were restored and maintained.As part of phase two, we are establishing a Social Employment Fund that will support work for the common good led by community organisations in areas as diverse as urban agriculture, public art, informal settlement upgrading and community safety.In the midst of the severe economic setback caused by the Coronavirus Disease pandemic, public and social employment has provided an important stimulus to job creation.
This is the implementation of our commitment that the state should actively support employment while the labour market recovers.Through the Presidential Employment Stimulus we have brought young people into the labour force in far greater numbers in an unprecedented manner in a short space of time.
Some 84% of the participants in phase one were young people under the age of 35, and two-thirds were women.In phase two we expect this number to be even higher, as the stimulus will provide almost R1 billion in funding for the Presidential Youth Employment Intervention.
As part of the intervention, several young people will be recruited into a revitalised National Youth Service.
Young people will receive training in digital skills and youth-owned enterprises will receive support to expand and hire.Unemployment in our country is a crisis.
We cannot afford endless delays in addressing this problem because of bureaucratic red-tape, outdated recruitment processes, lack of capacity and planning, or programmes that are short-lived or unsustainable.The success of the Presidential Employment Stimulus has shown that when we work together, move with speed, think creatively and manage our resources well, we can make a huge impact.The Presidential Employment Stimulus has demonstrated that we can create jobs if we work together as the public sector, labour, community and government.I have no doubt that the next phase of the Presidential Employment Stimulus will bring us even closer to meeting our collective goal of decent work and opportunities for all.
Beware of sex offenders
Sphelele Ngubane
CONSULT THE National Register for Sex Offenders before hiring staff to care for children and those with intellectual disabilities.
If you are an employer who runs an early childhood development centre, you are among the people required by law to check if your current and potential employees are on the National Register for Sex Offenders (NRSO).
The NRSO falls under the Department of Justice and Constitutional Development and employers must approach it to check if prospective employees are listed.An employer also includes a parent looking to employ a house helper, a school governing body or a hospital.
The NRSO was established by an Act of Parliament in 2007.
It is a record of names of those found guilty of sexual offences against children and people with intellectual disabilities.Ntombizodwa Matjila, the NRSO Registrar, says the register contains names of both male and female offenders.
These are people who have committed offences against children and those with intellectual disabilities, such as:
• Statutory rape;
• Compelling or causing children to witness sexual offences; • Sexual acts; • Sexual exploitation; • Sexual grooming; • Exposure or display of child pornography to chil-dren or people with intel-lectual disabilities and us-ing children or people with intellectual disabilities for pornographic purposes.“If an employer finds out that the name of an employee appears on the register, the employer must move that employee to another post that will not bring him or her in contact with a child or an adult with an intellectual disability,” says Matjila.If the employer is unable to move the employee to another position, they are required to terminate the employment contract.Information contained in the NRSO includes: Offenders’ full names and surname, nickname and their profession or trade; Offenders’ known physical address, and any contact details, including a postal address; Offenders’ identity number or passport number; The type of sexual offence.The register is not open to the public.
It can only be consulted by employers to obtain clearance certificates for those whose names are being checked.
It is a crime to disclose to anyone else the information contained in the register.
The legal end to a marriage
Dale Hes
When you’ve tried everything to make your marriage work, a divorce may be the best option for both you and your partner.
Divorce is difficult and stressful for families, and the legal process can be confusing.
A divorce is when a marriage is officially ended in a court of law.
There are two types of divorce: unopposed – where both parties are in agreement that a divorce should take place; and opposed – where the parties do not agree on a divorce or its terms.
Josephine Peta, Senior Legal Admin Officer at the Depart-ment of Justice and Constitu-tional Development’s Office of the Family Advocate, explains that the divorce process starts when a summons is issued.
“A person who wants to have their marriage dissolved can get a divorce summons at a high or regional court, or they can approach an attorney to assist with the process.
The spouse who starts the divorce proceedings is referred to as the plaintiff and the other spouse is the defendant,” said Peta.Peta explained that the di-vorce summons must:
• state that there is no reasonable chance of re-storing the relationship,• make provision for the division of joint belong-ings or the enforcement of the terms agreed upon in the antenuptial agree-ment signed at the begin-ning of the marriage, and• set out what arrange-ments will be made for the couple’s children, such as who the child will live with.
“The summons must also state that the defendant has 10 days – in the case where he or she lives in the same area as the plaintiff, or 20 days – if the parties reside in different provinces, to answer the sum-mons,” Peta added.
Once a case has been opened, documents are handed back to the plaintiff, who has to deliver two sets of these docu-ments to the sheriff in the area where the defendant works or lives.
“The sheriff will then serve the documents personally on the defendant and issue a return of service, proving that the documents were served.
Where there are children involved, the Office of the Family Advocate must be informed,” Peta pointed out.
After a period of 10 or 20 days, the plaintiff may enrol the divorce on the court roll.
In contested divorces, the defendant must answer the summons by notice of inten-tion to defend the matter.
“Once that is done, he or she must also file a plea within a specific period.
A plea is a statement in which the defendant responds to the allegations in the summons.After a plea is filed, the plaintiff can also reply to the plea or file a notice of set down.“The matter will then be enrolled for trial,” Peta con-cluded.
vWhat is a default divorce?A court will grant a divorce by default if a summons has been served on the spouse and he or she does not respond within the allocated time period.
It is, however, advisable to contact your spouse first because they may later attempt to set the divorce aside on the grounds that there was a good excuse for missing the deadline.
Vuk’uzenzele newspaper will be running a series of articles related to divorce.
The youth are our greatest asset
vukuzenzele unnamed
On June 16th 1976, the youth of Soweto and other parts of the country rose up against the iniquity of Bantu Education.
On that day and in the days that followed, many lost their lives.
They were killed by a callous regime that had little regard for black lives and thought nothing of opening fire on unarmed, uniformed schoolchildren.
These events hardened international opinion against the apartheid regime and gave further impetus to the liberation struggle.Young people have always been at the forefront of social protest, from the anti-au-thoritarian protests in Latin America in the late 1950s, to the protests across Africa in the late 1960s.
History faithfully records the contribution of the gen-eration of 1976 to the interna-tional student movement and its stance against oppression and injustice.
This historic event 45 years ago continues to be commem-orated across Africa and the world.
It is therefore disturbing that knowledge of June 16th is diminishing among young South Africans.
This is particularly so among the so-called Generation Z, or young people born between 1997 and 2015.
The 2019/2020 South Afri-can Social Attitudes Survey published by the Human Sciences Research Council found that close to 40% of Generation Z has not heard of the historical events of June 16th.
A similar percentage has heard about it but knows very little or nothing about it.
Nevertheless, the survey also found that young people of this generation are open to learning about key historical events and believe in their continued importance.
We need to do more as a country to ensure that the message of 1976 is transmit-ted faithfully.
This is a collective responsi-bility of government, schools, tertiary institutions, parents, families, musicians, artists, and all of society.
The generation that was born after apartheid ended inherited a country with a democratic Constitution and where fundamental freedoms are protected.The opportunities young black people have today are both vastly different and greatly improved.
Keeping the story of June 16th alive is a reminder to to-day’s generation of the great sacrifices made to secure their freedom.
Youth Day is a reminder of the immense power and agency that young people have to create a better future for themselves.
The struggles of young people in South Africa today are many.
Young people have remained at the forefront of activism, whether in pursuit of free education or against social ills like gender-based violence.
Today the greatest struggle young people wage is against unemployment, which has worsened under the COV-ID-19 pandemic.
Creating more opportuni-ties for young people, and access to these opportunities, is government’s foremost priority.
Everything that we do as a government contributes towards improving the lives of young people.
Tackling youth unemploy-ment requires accelerating economic growth, particular-ly in labour-intensive sectors, and building the capability of the state to fulfil its develop-mental role.
We are also driving this agenda through targeted interventions.
These include the Presidential Employment Stimulus, which has provid-ed work opportunities and livelihoods support for many young people.
We have launched a range of additional measures to create opportunities, enhance skills development, support young entrepreneurs and enable the full participation of young people in the econ-omy.This includes the establish-ment of a National Pathway Management Network, SA Youth, to make it easier for young people to view and access opportunities and re-ceive active support to find pathways into the labour market.
These are among the priori-ties of the Presidential Youth Employment Intervention, which was launched just weeks before we entered a national lockdown last year and which is now entering full implementation.The Presidential Youth Em-ployment Intervention was built on the understanding that addressing the youth un-employment crisis requires innovative thinking and strong partnerships across society.
Its ultimate objective is to find models that work, whether in skills develop-ment or active labour market policies, and to scale these rapidly to reach as many young people as possible.Most importantly, it recog-nises that young people must be at the centre of any effort to boost youth employment.
Young people are our great-est asset, and our greatest weapon in this fight.We salute the resilience of every young person playing their part to build and devel-op this country.
They are the young people volunteering in our commu-nities, building our country through the Presidential Employment Stimulus, run-ning their own businesses and studying to better them-selves.They are the young people who are forging their own path and bringing their fam-ilies along with them.We salute young people who keep working to im-prove their lives.
Young people are doing their part; they need government, and indeed all of society, to do ours.Our country is going through the most difficult of times, but we are working daily to expand the frontiers of hope.
We are seeing the green shoots of growth in our economy, and are confident this will translate to better opportunities for all.
Our task now is to ensure that young people are ready and able to access these opportunities, and to create their own.
Prevent burns this winter
Allison Cooper
Just as winter brings with it the need to keep warm, it also increases the risk of burn injuries from candles, fires, stoves, heaters and boiling water.
“Burn injuries inc rease dramatically during winter and parents and caregivers need to be extra careful to ensure their own and their children’s safety,” says Doctor Gary Dos Passos.
He is the Head of the Burns Unit at the Red Cross War Memorial Children’s Hospital (RCWMCH) and an executive committee member of the Burn Society of South Africa.
While accidental fires are inevitable, many burn injuries can be prevented with vigilance, proper adult supervision and safer practices.
“Flame burns are devastat ing injuries with substantial lifelong physical and psychosocial consequences for the affected survivors and their families,” says Dr Dos Passos.
How to prevent burnsBurn injuries can be pre vented around the home.
Here are some tips:
• Keep matches, lighters, accelerants (petrol and paraffin), candles, gas and paraffin lamps and heaters out of children’s reach.
• Do not throw accelerants onto flames.
This is extremely dangerous.
• Do not let children play near paraffin or gas lamps or heaters.
• Do not hold a child while cooking or leave children unsupervised in or near the kitchen.• Ensure the kettle is out of reach.
Buy a cordless kettle if you can.• Do not carry urns or pots of boiling water around near children.• Turn pot handles away from the front of the stove.• Put candles in a deep glass bottle with sand at the bottom so that they will go out if they fall over.• Do not cover fires with sand.
The heat stays in the sand for hours.
• Put cold water in the bath first, and then add hot water.
Always test the bath water with your elbow first.If you sustain a burn injury involving flames, stop, drop to the ground and roll to put out the flames.“Heat from a fire, hot water or electrical burn will continue to burn the tissue long after the contact is removed.
“Stop the burning by keeping the burnt body part under cold running tap water for 20 minutes.
Do not use ice, ice water, butter or any oil-based product on a burn,” says Dr Dos Passos.
Avoid becoming a human trafficking victim
Silusapho Nyanda
As the number of human trafficking cases being reported increases, it is important that you take steps to ensure your safety.
To avoid becoming a victim of trafficking, you should avoid travelling alone at night or on deserted streets.It is important that you are aware of your surroundings at all times.
Being alert will help spot something that is out of place.
If you notice a person or a car following you, find a crowded place and contact the police or someone you trust immediately.Traffickers often use the promise of a job to kidnap their victims and will approach potential victims offering them a job or some kind of opportunity.
This form of trafficking can happen anywhere – even on social media, at school, in the mall and outside your house.Make sure you conduct thorough research on potential employers before going to meet them in person for interviews.
This can be done by verifying that the company really exists by checking with the Companies and Intellectual Property Commission.
You should also tell some one you trust when you are going to an interview and arrange for them to call you after a certain amount of time.
If possible, have someone go with you.
Be careful when using social media, especially when a stranger offers to help, offers money, a place to stay or a job opportunity in response to something you posted.If you are going out to meet someone new, do so at a public place and let someone you trust know where you are.When going out with children, keep them close and make sure you can see them at all times.You should never send a child on an errand without a trusted adult to watch over them.
Get into the habit of checking in on your children regularly, so you know where they are.
For more information on human trafficking, contact the National Human Trafficking Hotline on: 0800 222 777.
To report human trafficking contact the police on 10111.This information was supplied by the Department of Justice and Constitutional Development
Building a society that works
vukuzenzele unnamed
The launch of the Presidential Employment Stimulus last week marks a fundamental shift in our ap proach to tackling unem ployment.
We are undertaking a far-reaching and ambitious public investment in human capital, with the state as both a creator and an enabler of jobs.
The Presidential Employment Stimulus is unprecedented in its scale and breadth, involving a public investment of R100 billion over the next three years.We will protect and create directly-funded jobs and livelihood support interventions while the labour market recovers from the coronavirus pandemic.
Each of these is ready for implementation, and is additional to existing commitments.While some of the interventions build on the strengths of existing programmes, the stimulus also includes new and innovative approaches.
This includes a focus on what we have termed ‘social employment’.
We are working from the premise that there is no shortage of work to be done to address the many social problems in our society.
The aim is to support the considerable creativity, initiative and institutional capabilities that exist in the wider society to engage people in work that serves the common good.
This work cuts across a range of themes, including food security, ending gender-based violence, informal settlement upgrading and much more.This will supplement the efforts of the public sector, allowing for greater scale and social impact as well as new forms of partnership with diverse social actors.The stimulus includes a new national programme to employ teaching and school assistants in schools.
Schools are making these appointments right now, delivering new opportunities in every community across the length and breadth of the country.Public employment is not just for unskilled work.
There is a cross-cutting focus on graduates, with opportunities for nurses, science graduates, artisans and others.The stimulus will also protect jobs in vulnerable sectors that have been hit hard by the pandemic.
Support will be provided to Early Childhood Development practitioners, mainly self-employed women.
Over 74,000 small farmers will also receive production input grants.As a nation, we need arts and culture to lift our spirits once more – the stimulus provides new funding to help the sector back onto its feet, including support to digital content-creation and expansion of e-commerce platforms.This will enable artists to adapt to the new market conditions that the pandemic has imposed on us all and to seize new opportunities for growth.A critical enabler for wider job creation, made more important by the pandemic, is connectivity.
To overcome the digital divide, the stimulus will provide affordable, high-speed broadband to low-income households through innovative connection subsidies and the expansion of free public WiFi.As our country recovers from the devastation of the Coronavirus pandemic, we are in no doubt as to the size of the task before us.
We have to achieve an economic recovery that is swift and inclusive.
We have to get as many of our people as pos-sible working again.
We also have to regain lost ground in the provision of basic services and critical infrastructure, addressing social challenges and transforming townships and rural communities too.
Public employment is an instrument that can do all of the above: creating jobs at scale in the short term while markets recover, and creating social value in the process.
The example is often cited of the massive public works programme undertaken by the United States after the Great Depression in the 1930s.
This was not just a stimulus, but also promoted social participation and inclusion.There are several examples of innovative public employment programmes in the developing world, including in India, Ethiopia and here in South Africa.
These programmes make a direct investment in local economies, reaching poorer areas first, supporting local small enterprises and trickling up into the wider economy from there.They also promote social participation and inclusion, providing communities with the means to change their lives as they undertake new forms of work.
In doing so, they contribute to transformation both at a local level and within broader society.Direct public investment to support employment and create economic opportunities that generate social value does more than just tackle the unemployment crisis.It is responsive, because it uses the state’s resources to respond to local community needs, be it for greener spaces, food security, more early childhood development centres, or for better and more accessible roads.It is progressive, because it offers social protection and income security to those who face destitution because they are unable to find work.It is an investment in the future, in that it supports the broader economic recovery agenda by urgently getting our people to work on improving our national and municipal infrastructure.Through the interventions in the stimulus, we are creating work for those who need it, while leaving a lasting impact on entire communities.Like public employment programmes across the world, this employment stimulus supports and complements the critical role of the private sector in creating jobs.
It is counter-cyclical, in that as the recovery advances, the scale of public employment will decline.
The work experience and skills acquired by beneficiaries of the Presidential Employment Stimulus will improve their prospects of securing formal employment.
The experience gained is also a pathway to entrepreneurial activity.
Participants will improve their skills and capabilities to start their own businesses, and can use the steady income provided by public employment to branch out into other income-generating activities.
I have consistently affirmed that the COVID-19 crisis is also a window of opportunity to build back better.At this time of great upheaval, we would be doing ourselves no favours by making unrealistic promises that raise expectations, only to come short when they are not met.
This is why each of the jobs and livelihood support interventions is fully funded, with a clear implementation plan.
The employment stimulus is not about vague commitments for some time in the future, but about jobs being created right here and now.The stimulus is the result of extensive consultation with national departments, provinces and metros to rapidly design employment pro grammes that can be rolled out or expanded within six months.The implementing departments and other stakeholders were rigorously assessed on their capacity to implement.In every one of the programmes that fall under the stimulus, opportunities will be widely advertised and recruitment will be fair, open and transparent.The goals we have set ourselves are realistic, measura ble and achievable, and draw lessons from past experience and international best prac tice.
Our people are ready and willing to work.
This vast potential must be harnessed, and our collective skills and capabilities brought to bear in rebuilding our country in the wake of the coronavirus.The Presidential Employment Stimulus provides a respite for families who have endured a long hard winter with greatly reduced income, and for individuals who have spent many years without work.Real, decent work is the right of every human being.
It is a precondition for economic growth and social stability.By giving effect to this fundamental right, the Presidential Employment Stimulus is making a decisive contribution to building a society that works.
Sassa kids make SA proud ThOuSaNDS Of beneficiaries will get a chance to break away from the cycle of poverty.
Noluthando Motswai
Then Tumelo Mashigo was born he had lit-
tle prospect of living a nor- mal life.
Shortly after his birth, doctors informed his mother that he had a rare condition called phocome- lia and his hands were un- derdeveloped.
However, living with this condition did not deter Mashigo.
Instead it gave him the fighting spirit needed to make something
of his life.
Fast forward to 2017 and Mashigo was announced as the second best performing learner with special needs in the matric class of 2017 in South Africa.
He passed matric with flying colours, achieving three distinctions and be- ing accepted by the Uni- versity of Pretoria to study Public Management and International Relations.
He said without the assis- tance of the South Africa
Social Security Agency (Sassa), his dreams would not have come true.
“My mother is unem- ployed so from a young age I have been getting the disability grant from Sas- sa, which had such a huge impact on my family,” he said.
“The grant helped my mother care for me by buying me food and all the things I required for school.”
The 18-year-old from
Tsakane in Gauteng com- pleted his matric at the Muriel Brand School in Brakpan which is an educa- tional facility for learners with special education needs.
He was also the school’s deputy head boy for 2017.
This was also the school
that prepared the confident young man for leadership in the future.
“I have an interest in pol
COVID-19 corruption perpetrators brought to book
Vukuzenzele Unnamed
Individuals and companies who were involved in corruption relating to the gov ernment’s procurement of Coronavirus Disease (COVID-19) goods and services are being held accountable for their actions.
The Special Investigation Unit’s (SIU) final report on its probe into allegations relating to any misuse of COVID-19 funds, across all spheres of government and the private sector was recently authorised for release to the public by President Cyril Ramaphosa.
The report is an important step in the fight against corruption and maladministration in the public and private sectors, he said.
In July 2020, President Ramaphosa authorised the investigation by the SIU.
At the time, he gave his commitment that if the SIU found evidence that a criminal offence had been committed, it would be obliged to refer the evidence to the National Prosecuting Authority (NPA).
The SIU was also aut horised to institute civil proceedings for the recovery of any damages or losses incurred by the state.
Report findings
The SIU investigated 5 467 contracts awarded to 3 066 service providers, worth a total of R14.3 billion.
The investigation into 4 549 contracts have been finalised, and 2 803 of these were found to be irregular.
This amounts to 62% of the finalised investigations.
“This investigation targeted individuals and institutions who believed they could exploit a moment of national vulnerability to enrich themselves and those with whom they colluded to abuse public resources,” the President said.
He added it was unacceptable that so many contracts associated with saving lives and protecting livelihoods were irregular, unlawful or fraudulent.
“This investigation demonstrates our determination to root out corruption and to deal with perpetrators,” said President Ramaphosa.
The final report details matters that the SIU has referred to the NPA, departments and entities in the public sector and other parties.
The NPA will finalise the process of bringing wrongdoers to book and addressing weaknesses identified by the SIU investigation, the President explained.
Action taken
Since the start of the investigation, the SIU, working with other agencies, has made the following progress:
• 45 matters, with a combined value of R2.1 billion, have been enrolled with the Special Tribunal on Corruption, Fraud and Illicit Money Flows.
The spe-cial tribunal has a statutory mandate to recover public funds stolen through corruption, fraud and illicit money flows, and take civil action against perpetrators;
• 224 cases have been referred for disciplinary action against officials in government departments or entities;
• 386 cases have been referred to the NPA, and three have been referred for executive action;
• 330 cases have been referred for administrative action, which includes blacklisting (not being able to do work for gov ernment).
According to the report, a total of R551.5 million (value of cash and assets) is to be recovered, while R34.2 million has been recovered to date.
The investigation prevented a R114.2 million loss, and set contracts aside valued at R170.4 million.
The SIU expects these matters to be completed between March and April 2022, before the submission of a supplementary report to the President at the end of June.
The report does not include details of ongoing investigations into allega tions received by the SIU after the deadline set for the final report.
These include investigations into 476 service providers, linked to 964 contracts, valued at more than R961.6 million.
The outcomes of these investigations, the Presidency said, will also be provided in the June report.
The President thanked the SIU for the work done in the past 18 months, and also whistle-blowers and other witnesses who provided information to investigators.
New laws strengthen the fight against GBV
Vukuzenzele Unnamed
Late last year, I received a letter from a group of concerned citizens calling on the government to protect the women and children of this country from violence.
Pointing to an increase in rape and sexual assault, they wrote that as women they continue to live in fear; they are losing their faith in the law.
I was deeply moved and touched by their account of the fear that the women of our country are subjected to on a daily basis.
In response to the suffering that women and children are subjected to, we have passed laws designed to protect them.
But despite penalties to remove perpetrators from society, women and children continue to suffer and die.
I recently signed into law three pieces of legislation that honour our promises to strengthen the criminal justice system, promote accountability across the state and put support for survivors at the centre of all our efforts.
The new Criminal and Related Matters Amendment Act protects the vulnerable from secondary victimisation by allowing courts to appoint intermediaries through which a minor, a disabled person or an elderly person can be examined in proceedings.
It also allows for the extended use of evidence by means of an audio-visual link.
This helps to shield a witness against harm, prevent unreasonable delays and save costs in proceedings.
The new law also significantly tightens up our bail regime.
A prosecutor who does not oppose bail in designated cases must have their reasons placed on record.
The court must consider any threats of violence made against the complainant and the complainant’s view of their own safety.
Unless the court is satisfied that exceptional circumstances exist that warrant release on bail, bail must be denied.
The new Criminal Law (Sexual Offences and Related Matters) Amendment Act outlaws sexual exploitation and grooming of persons with mental disabilities, and provides that sexual offences against persons who are mentally disabled must be recorded in the National Register of Sex Offenders (NRSO).
We have responded to calls to tighten up the management of the NRSO.
Those who have been convicted of sex crimes against children or mentally disabled persons, have previous convictions in this respect, and have been sentenced to terms longer than 18, months can only apply to have their names removed from the register after 20 years.
The Act further regulates the reporting duty of people who are aware that sexual offences have been committed against vulnerable persons.
The new Domestic Violence Amendment Act takes account of some of the complexities in violent domestic relationships.
We have tightened up the process of obtaining protection orders, and broadened the circumstances under which they can be applied for.
We have addressed the issue of women and children being victimised despite having, or being in process of applying for, a protection order.
If a court believes a complainant is in imminent danger it can issue a protection order immediately without needing to give a respondent notice of the proceedings.
Significantly, if the court releases someone charged with domestic violence on bail who does not have a protection order granted against them, the court must issue one after holding an enquiry.
When the court issues a protection order it must at the same time authorise the issuing of an arrest warrant, suspended, that must be provided to the South African Police Service (SAPS).
If a SAPS member sus-pects a complainant is in danger due to breach of the order, they must arrest the respondent immediately.
The Act now expressly protects the elderly from all forms of domestic violence, and also permits complainants to apply for protection orders online, saving them time and travel costs.
To protect complainants against further abuse, the court may an issue a Safety Monitoring Notice that will require a member of SAPS to be in constant contact with the complainant without the knowledge of the abuser.
Survivors of GBV often complain of ill-treatment or disregard for their concerns when they lay complaints at police stations.
SAPS members who fail to comply with their obligations under the new law will be guilty of misconduct.
All adult persons who have knowledge or suspicion that domestic violence is being perpetrated against a child, a person with a mental disability or an elderly person are obliged to report such acts to a social worker or to the police.
Failure to do so is a criminal offence.
This puts into law the principle that violence against women and children is everyone’s responsibility.
The passage of these new laws is a step in this direction.
But it is not the solution.
We must prevent violence and abuse from happening in the first place.
Working together as a society, we must use our voice, our agency and our reserves of courage to forever end the violence perpetrated by men against women and children.
CACH connects students with learning opportunities
Silusapho Nyanda
Young people who have not yet secured spots at higher education institutions can turn to the Central Application Clearing House (CACH) system for help.
CACH is an online government service managed by the Department of Higher Education and Training (DHET).
The service helps those who need access to university, technical and vocational education and training (TVET) colleges and skills development opportunities.
“CACH services have been available from 24 January 2022, and will close on 31 March, to assist those who need to enter tertiary education but face challenges with getting space,” says Minister of Higher Education and Training Dr Blade Nzimande.
CACH can help those who applied for admission to a university or a college on time in 2021, but were not offered a place in a programme of their choice.
The DHET explained that this usually happens when the applicant does not meet the necessary requirements or the institution has reached its limit on the number of students it can enrol.
CACH can also help those who applied to a higher learning institution and were accepted, but now want to change their courses.
CACH will refer individuals to career development services and where possible, provide an opportunity for them to be considered for spaces still available at universities, TVET colleges or Sector Education and Training Authority (SETA) learnerships, without having to travel to any institution.
All public universities, TVET colleges and SETAs can access the CACH database to search for individuals who meet the criteria for available spaces.
“Institutions select individuals from the CACH database and make direct contact with those they have selected,” says DHET spokesperson Ishmael Mnisi.
Applicants who sign up for CACH must submit their details, including their preferred fields of study.
Applicants have options to accept or reject study offers on the CACH system.
Institutions of higher learning will only be able to access applicants’ information from CACH once applicants have signed up and uploaded their Grade 12 results.
Mnisi says CACH also helps prospective students who are undecided about career choices by referring them to DHET’s Khetha Career Development Service.
Food at school ensures children don’t go hungry
Vukuzenzele Unnamed
Over nine million children receive a nutritious meal at school thanks to government’s National School Nutrition Programme (NSNP), which was introduced in 1994.
The programme aims to improve children’s ability to learn, by reducing malnutrition and hunger and improving school attendance, especially at disadvantaged schools.
“The programme is critical for furthering learners’ constitutional rights to basic nutrition and basic education,” explains Deputy Minister of Basic Education Dr Reginah Mhaule.
As a result of the NSNP, more children are attending school on time and more regularly, and their concentration in class has improved.
According to the Department of Basic Education (DBE), learners are taught good eating and lifestyle habits.
Schools are also encouraged to set up their own food gardens to supplement the NSNP menu.
Learners, teachers and parents are taught grow their own food.
NSNP awards
Thabang Primary School in Bethlehem, Free State, is one of the schools that benefits from the NSNP.
The school recently won the NSNP Best School Award.
The awards celebrate schools’ nutrition programmes by looking at their hygiene and safety practices, nutritious meals, food gardens and nutrition education.
“I am extremely grateful that the school won the award,” says Seyanokeng Sejake, the Thabang Pri mary principal for the past 24 years.
Thabang Primary School has been running its nutrition programme since 1994.
Today, it ensures that its 1 065 learners receive a healthy breakfast daily from a local business.
The food is cooked by unemployed members of the community, who are appointed by the school governing body (SGB).
“Our six employed voluntary food handlers (VFH) make the food provided by the Department of Basic Education through the allocation of funds to the school,” says Sejake.
They VFHs each receive a stipend for preparing the food.
Thabang Primary School took top honours at the awards due to the hard work and commitment of its SGB, management team and functional NSNP Com mittee, says Sejake.
“Punctuality is the order of the day.
We don’t allow absenteeism, without a valid reason, and we have no dropouts.
Our learners’ concentration and general performance have also improved,” she adds.
As the prize for winning the award is a state-of-the-art kitchen built by the Tiger Brands Foundation, the school’s nutrition programme is set to become even better.
The school also ensures that there are enough food supplies which are managed properly, to ensure there is always food for the programme.
“For example, we have a food garden that supplies vegetables to supplement the NSNP allocation,” explains Sejake.
Award winners
In the Best Schools category, Grootdrink Intermediate, in the Mgcawu District in the Northern Cape, took second place and Aaron Gqedu Primary School, in Nelson Mandela Bay in the Eastern Cape, came third.
They will receive kitchen equipment from the Depart ment of Basic Education.
The Best District award was won by Umzinyathi (KwaZulu-Natal).
The ZF Mgcawu District (Northern Cape) came second and Metro North (Western Cape) came third.
Each district won office and computer equipment.
In 2020/21, the NSNP provided meals to children at 21 189 schools.
Improved tax revenue supports recovery and growth
Vukuzenzele Unnamed
Recently, the South African Revenue Service (SARS) announced in its preliminary tax revenue collection outcome that it had collected over R1.5 trillion between April 2021 and March 2022.
This a 25% improvement over the previous year and a 15% increase over the last year prior to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Over the same period, SARS also paid out its highest amount in tax refunds since it was established 25 years ago.
A competent tax revenue collection agency is at the heart of building a capable state.
Tax revenue propels our nation’s development.
The money collected by SARS finances service delivery and infrastructure.
Through the R17.8 trillion that SARS has collected since its establishment in 1997, we have been able to build more social infrastructure like clinics, schools and hospitals, upgrade and build new roads, and support society’s most vulnerable through social grants and other measures.
When tax revenue collection systems and their supporting legislation are efficient, uncomplicated and equitable, it incentivises greater compliance.
Restoring stability and credibility in SARS was among my foremost priorities when I was elected President in 2018.
Like a number of other key institutions, SARS had suffered from the ill-effects of state capture, with political meddling, mismanagement and other factors seriously affecting its efficiency.
This had the direct consequence of not only undermining taxpayer morality, but also loss of business confidence in the organisation.
In 2018, I appointed a commission of inquiry into tax administration and governance at SARS chaired by retired Justice Robert Nugent.
The commission delivered its final report by the end of the same year.
Four years later, SARS has implemented nearly all of the 16 recommendations and 27 sub-recommendations to restore stability to the organisation.
SARS has driven a focused turnaround strategy to position itself at the forefront of efficiency and service excellence.
It has a concerted programme to promote tax morality and compliance.
Current high commodity prices, resulting in increased corporate income tax revenues, have contributed to the latest revenue collection windfall.
What has also played a role are the steps SARS has taken to improve its information technology and other infrastructure, modernise customs, recruit skilled staff, and combat tax avoidance and criminal activity.
One of the recommendations of the Nugent Commission was that SARS re-establish capacity to monitor and investigate illicit trades.
The Illicit Economy Unit that was reconstituted in 2018 has notched up a number of successes in combating illicit economy trades, including through a focus on customs noncompliance.
Tax collection from JSE listed companies, multinationals and high net worth individuals is now more effectively managed through its Large Business Unit, which was relaunched in 2020.
As a result of SARS’ turnaround there has been improved compliance in personal income tax, corporate income tax and Pay as You Earn.
SARS is taking the wind out of the sails of tax dodgers, beneficiaries of the proceeds of crime, and those involved in corrupt activities.
It is well-established that ‘the taxman’ is one of the most efficient tools to combat corruption.
In cases where an individual’s lifestyle does not match what they declare, SARS has been conducting lifestyle audits.
In the last year, SARS has completed lifestyle audits that resulted in the collection of a further R474 million.
As we forge ahead with efforts to strengthen the capacity of the state and rebuild institutions that were systematically weakened by state capture, we have much to learn from what SARS has achieved in a relatively short space of time.
When state institutions are well-run and efficient, when they demonstrate credibility and fairness in their operations, this contributes to increasing levels of trust in government.
Business and investor confidence also improve, encouraging greater investment and economic growth.
The leadership and the staff SARS are to be congratulated on its performance.
Thanks must go to the loyal South African taxpayer.
Without their cooperation, the latest revenues would not have been possible.
That SARS has expanded the tax base with 1.8 million new registrations over the past year is another sterling achievement.
We can only rebuild South Africa if we continue to meet this shared obligation, and if we intensify the work currently underway to ensure that these taxes are used wisely and efficiently.
Keep children safe online
Vukuzenzele Unnamed
With the world increasingly moving online, it’s important for children to take advantage these opportunities while also staying safe.
The Government Communication and Information System (GCIS) and Digify Africa recently hosted a webinar with Media Monitoring Africa (MMA) and the Film and Publication Board (FPB) to teach children, educators, parents and the public about how to be responsible online.
Phakamile Khumalo, the Programme Manager of Public and Media Skills Development at MMA, said seven out of 10 children who answered questions as part of the SA Kids Online Study said they used the internet without their parents’ permission.
Only four out of 10 children said they have some sort of information about online safety.
This shows that children need skills and resources to help them use the internet safely.
Mmaletjema Poto, the FPB’s Child Protection Officer, said parents need to be aware of the dangers their children face online, in cluding viewing child pornography or child sexual abuse, and being groomed by sexual predators.
Children can become the target of online sexual predators by just conducting an innocent internet search and clicking on the wrong link.
Offenders then gain their trust and start grooming them.
“The child is often embarrassed and therefore doesn’t speak about it, which makes it hard for them to get out of the grooming cycle,” said Poto.
She also warned against sharing videos or images of child pornography online.
“It has become a norm to share content on social media.
But sharing this type of content is evidence of child abuse.
Being in possession of such content or sharing it is a criminal offence,” added Poto.
Help at hand
There are various resources available to help children use the internet safely.
The MMA runs Web Rangers, a digital literacy programme to upskill learners, teachers and parents.
Educational videos about cyberbullying, sexting and online grooming, are available at www.webrangers.co.za
The MMA also helps children through its Hashplay (https://hashplay.co.za) website, which includes a social media platform that allows children to talk to an online consultant about what they are experiencing on social media.Digify Africa has a free Kitso WhatsApp bot that helps children develop digital literacy skills.
Visit https://digifyafrica.com/learners-responsiblecitizens.
You can report online child sexual abuse or child violence to the FPB by emailing hotline@fpb.org.za or calling 012 003 1400.
It can be reported anonymously.
SA media is a key pillar of our democracy
vukuzenzele unnamed
In many countries around the world, the coronavirus pandemic has required the limita tion of many civil liberties and put social cohesion to the test.
But countries with strong institutions, vigilant judicial systems and a robust media have been able to prevent human rights from being undermined and the authority of the state being abused.
It has been six months since the national state of disaster was proclaimed.
Despite the unprecedented nature of the disease and the immense challenge of placing a country of 58 million people under lockdown, we have fared well.
We have managed to contain the spread of the disease primarily because of the cooperation and vigilance of all citizens.This is in no small part due to the sterling work of our media.We owe a debt of gratitude to South Africa’s hardworking and tenacious journalists.
They have kept our people informed by disseminating key health messages about social distancing and hygiene.
They have done so under extremely trying conditions, often with limited resources.They have told the stories of the effects of lockdown on the lives of people and their businesses.
They have been out in the villages, towns and cities, bringing stories of ordinary people and drawing national attention to problems being experienced in hospitals and clinics, prompting government action.Our media have also shone a light on excesses that perhaps would not have ordinarily come to light.
They have fulfilled their watchdog role by unearthing acts of corruption and maladministration, sparking a massive national debate and leading to a number of high-profile investigations.
Through this reporting they have earned people’s trust.A free press is not an end in itself.
It is a means by which democracy is secured and upheld.
During this pandemic, our media has played not just its traditional watchdog role, but exercised its civic duty in supporting the national effort to contain the coronavirus.Given the importance of the media to the health of our de-mocracy, it is a great concern that like all other sectors of the economy, the coronavirus crisis has hit our media houses hard.
Some publications lost as much as 60 percent of their income in the early days of the lockdown.
A number of companies have had to implement salary cuts, reduce staff numbers or reduce hours worked.
Regrettably, some publications have even been forced to close, among them some of South Africa’s most established and well-known magazine titles.The job losses that have resulted from the lockdowns have exacerbated a crisis for media companies already facing challenges like loss of advertising revenues, falling circulation and market share being taken by mobile-first news and other technologies.
These financial difficulties are being faced across the board, from online titles to traditional broadsheets to the public broadcaster.This was one of the issues that was raised sharply during my engagement with the South African National Editors’ Forum recently.
Instead of lamenting their fate, however, the media industry is working hard to refine business models, to drive innovation and to retain staff as much as possible.
At the same time, the media is a unique entity in any society because its practitioners fulfil a role that is so essential to our democratic order.
They work to keep the public informed and to keep power in check.
We need more journalists, not less.
That is why the loss of even a single journalist is not just a loss to the industry but to the country.We need our media veterans, who bring with them vast experience and institutional memory, and are able to offer critical reportage and informed analysis.
At the same time we need more young journalists in the profession who are tech-savvy, abreast with new trends in storytelling and in touch with the concerns of a youthful population.As a society we owe the media our full support.
Whether it is electing to pay for content, supporting crowdfunded journalism, paying our SABC license fees or simply buying a newspaper, we can all play our part to support this industry in crisis.
As government, despite the gloomy economic climate we will continue to extend advertising spend to publications and broadcasters, especially community media.The private sector must also continue to support the industry through advertising and working with media houses in the production of innovative content in line with global media trends.
Local philanthropic and donor organisations should also come on board and support public interest journalism ventures, as is the case in many democracies.The proliferation of fake news during the pandemic, primarily on social media platforms, has added to the urgency for more news that is accurate, fair and impartial.
During this time our people have relied on our established media houses for information, once again underscoring their importance as pillars of our democracy.As we begin the great task of rebuilding our economy in the aftermath of the pandemic, the media industry will need our support more than ever.
The free press was once described as ‘the unsleeping guardian of every other right that free men and women prize’.
As we salute their role in this pandemic, let us do what we can to ensure that the free and diverse media in our country is able to survive and thrive.
CGE provides access to justice
Dale Hes
Victims of gen der-based vio lence (GBV) who struggle to find the help and support they need are urged to contact the Commission for Gender Equality (CGE).
The commission can assist with child maintenance, sexual harassment, gender discrimination and GBV , and offers free legal advice and services to victims.
The commission’s Mofihli Teleki says one of the CGE’s roles is to help victims open court cases.
“The legal department accompanies complainants to magistrates courts to open domestic violence cases and assists with the completion of necessary forms.
The commission also plays a monitoring role in cases, including rape and sexual offences, sexual harassment and femicide.” The commission can also help a victim to obtain a protection order and often works with the National Prosecuting Authority to ensure that the victim gets a fair trial.
“In this case, the commission conducts a Watching Brief and performs its monitoring function over GBV cases and examines key issues, such as insensitive conduct by presiding officers, secondary victimisation of survivors and in sensitive cross examination processes,” Teleki explains.
When victims struggle to gain access to justice in Domestic Violence Courts, the commission can act on their behalf, providing legal representation.
It is also able to refer victims for psychological support.
An essential serviceThe commission has been functioning throughout lockdown as an essential service.“Even though some court cases have been re-scheduled as a result of the lock down, urgent matters that pertain to domestic violence and GBV continue to receive attention through the justice system,” says Teleki.
The commission ensures that the rights of the public are protected.
South Africa is an open democracy, committed to fundamental human rights, including the right to equality and the inherent dignity of the person, as per the provisions of the Constitution.
Register a complaint Victims of GBV and abuse can call the CGE’s toll-free number 0800 007 709 to register a complaint.
They can also send a message to the Facebook page: Gender Commission of South Africa.
NA
vukuzenzele unnamed
“Never, never and never again shall it be that this beautiful land will again experience the oppression of one by another and suffer the indignity of being the skunk of the world.”
What HIV positive breastfeeding moms should know
vukuzenzele unnamed
With South Africa observing World Aids Day on the 1st of December, the KwaZulu-Natal Department of Health has advised HIV positive mothers to consider breastfeeding their babies exclusively for six months.
According to the depart ment, if you are an HIV positive breastfeeding mother, it is important to discuss feeding choices with your HIV counsellor.
If you choose to breast feed, be sure to breastfeed exclusively for the first six months.
Research has shown that the baby has very little chance of getting HIV from breastmilk if the mother exclusively breastfeeds.
During the months that you are pregnant, and breastfeeding, be sure to use a condom during sexual intercourse to prevent any new infection.
If you have any problems such a painful nipples or breasts, be sure to go the clinic early for help.
The department strongly recommends exclusive breastfeeding because it helps the baby develop a stronger immune system, and a stronger bond between mother and baby.
Breastfeeding also reduces the mother’s risks of developing breast cancer.
Breastfeeding myths and facts There are several myths asso-ciated with breastfeeding, the department debunked these myths by answering the following frequently asked questions by mothers who are HIV positive and those who are not HIV positive.Question: My neighbour said that I should get some medicine to clean my baby's stomach.
Is this important?Answer: Colostrum, which is the first form of breast-milk that is released by the mammary glands after giving birth, cleans the meconium from the stomach.
You will not need any medicines for further cleaning as breastmilk is clean, and actually lines the stomach, protecting it from bacteriaQuestion: In the first few days, if I do not have enough milk, can I give water or other milk as well?Answer: The colostrum is all the baby needs.
You just need to feed the baby often so that the milk will come in you make lots of milk that way.
Ask the midwife to give you your baby within the first half hour after birth, so you can put the baby to the breast.
The baby will learn quickly how to suckle and this will help you to make more milk.Question: I am giving breastmilk, but the baby is not satisfied.
Do I need to give formula as well?Answer: No, you can make more milk by feeding the baby more often.
Allow the baby time to drink until satis-fied on one breast to make sure the baby gets hindmilk which is the is the milk your baby gets at the end of a feed.
The more the baby suckles, the more milk is made.Question: My baby wants to feed so often maybe I don't have enough milk?Answer: Maybe the baby is growing quickly, and so needs more milk.
By feeding often, you can make enough milk for their needs.
The milk will not run out.
Allow extra time for the baby to suckle don't pull the baby off the breast.
If a baby has more than six wet nappies every day, is being fed often (at least 8-12 times every day), and the baby is gaining at least 500g every month, then you are making enough milk.Question: If my baby cries often, what do I do?Answer: Comfort your baby by putting them to the breast more often.
Babies need to be close to their mothers.
Mothers and babies sharing the same room will encourage this.
If your baby is hungry, thirsty or upset, suckling at the breast will satisfy them.
It is unlikely that you will overfeed your baby when giving breastmilk only.Question: Is it good to give other drinks?Answer: No, adding other drinks means that the baby is more likely to get diseases like diarrhoea and pneu-monia.
Also, if the baby has other drinks, they won't suckle as often and you won't make enough milk.Question: Doesn't the baby need water when it is hot?Answer: No, the first milk (foremilk) has lots of water and quenches the baby's thirst.
Just make sure you feed your baby often in hot weather.Question: When should I add other foods?Answer: After six months, continue breastfeeding as before, but add other foods as well.
The baby is only ready to start learning about eating after 6 months.
PrEP can prevent HIV
Allison Cooper
As South Africa comme morates World Aids
Day on 1 December and 16 Days of Activism against Gender-Based Violence (GBV), from 25 November to 10 December, Vuk’uzenzele explores the relationship between GBV and HIV/AIDS.
The Gender-Based Vio lence and Femicide (GBVF) Response Fund strives to ensure that South Africa is free from GBVF against women; children; and the lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, intersex, queer/questioning, asexual and more (LGBTQIA+) community.
The fund was launched by President Cyril Ramaphosa in February 2021, to support the implementation of the National Strategic Plan on GBVF.
According to the fund’s website, it plays a critical role in making change happen, based on research, awareness and practical support to organisations actively engaged in the fight against GBVF.
One of the organisations supported by the fund is the KwaZulu-Natal based Gugu Dlamini Foundation, which received R250 000 from the GBVF in 2022.
Executive Director of the Gugu Dlamini Foundation, Mandisa Mabaso, established the foundation in 2010 after her mother – the late Gugu Dlamini – was stoned to death in 1998 in Durban for disclosing her HIV-positive status.
“The foundation aims to strengthen local governance to improve the GBVF response, which is essential to achieving HIV epidemic control in South Africa,” says Mabaso.
“It also aims to reduce HIV/AIDS infections, increase access to care and improve health outcomes for females and males infected and affected by HIV/AIDS,” she adds.
The funding that the foundation receives assists 522 255 women and girls and 900 men and boys from families affected by GBV and domestic violence; abused persons living with disabilities; and the LGBTQIA+ community, says Mabaso.
According to UNAIDS, in areas of high HIV burden, women who are victims of GBV face up to a 50% higher chance of acquiring HIV .
Some of the reasons for this are rape and the refusal by men to use condoms.
What is PrEP?
One of the ways to prevent HIV infection is by taking Pre-Exposure Prophylaxis (PrEP), which is a medicine taken daily by HIV-negative people who are at high risk of being exposed to HIV , through sexual contact or injection drug use.
In August, Health Minister, Dr Joe Phaahla said that South Africa has the highest oral PrEP initiation in sub-Sahara.
He said that 70%, or 2 419, of South Africa’s public primary healthcare facilities have integrated oral PrEP into their routine package of services.
“A person on PrEP does not have to take it for the rest of their lives, they can choose to take it every time they are at risk of being infected with HIV .
However, for PrEP to be effective, it must be taken every day [during this time],” confirms Mabaso.
It should also be used with other protective methods, such as female and male condoms, because PrEP does not protect a person against other sexually transmitted infections and it is not a contraceptive.
Mabaso says that in cases where a couple wants to have a baby, PrEP can assist to prevent HIV infection of the
HIV-negative partner and the unborn baby.
Meanwhile, earlier this year, the South African Health Products Regulatory Authority approved the use of a vaginal ring as a PrEP .
The ring contains an antiretroviral drug called dapivirine and must be changed every month.
In addition, a new PrEP – an injection that lasts for two months – is awaiting approval.
Once approved, people will no longer have to remember to take a pill each day.
Safe sex The foundation also aims to reduce HIV infections by promoting the use of condoms and safe sex.
“We urge children and youth to delay engaging in sexual intercourse until they are ready to make more informed and healthier choices,” says Mabaso.
“We also promote safer sex by emphasising condom use and only having one partner at a time.
The abuse of drugs – especially those that are injected – is strongly discouraged as it increases the risk of being infected with HIV ,” she adds.
The foundation also empo wers people living with, at risk of and affected by HIV/GBV to know their rights and to access justice and legal services to prevent and challenge the violations of human rights.
Jobs figures show our economyis on the road to recovery
vukuzenzele unnamed
Over the last few years, South Africans have had to contend with slow growth and rising unemployment.
This has been worsened by a devastating pandemic, an attempted insurrection unrest in July 2021, and, earlier this year, severe floods in parts of KwaZulu-Natal, Eastern Cape and North West.
Amidst all this, the energy crisis has loomed large, causing damage to the economy and hardship for households and businesses.Yet, even amidst these formidable challenges, our society and economy has proven to be resilient.
And indications are that our economy is showing encouraging signs of recovery.The latest employment figures, in particular, give us grounds for cautious hope.Statistics South Africa recorded a decline in the unemployment rate for the second quarter of 2021.
Significantly, their measurement shows that the actual number of people employed rose from 14.5 million people in the fourth quarter of 2021 to 15.5 million in the second quarter of 2022.
This is an encouraging increase of much-needed jobs over the first half of this year.These jobs were mainly created in sectors such as community and social services, trade, finance and, notably, construction.Of course, much more needs to be done if we are to make a significant dent in our country’s high unemployment rate.
At the same time, these figures indicate that the priority areas of the Economic Reconstruction and Recovery Plan – such as mass public employment, economic reform and infrastructure development – are having an impact on job creation.With infrastructure development and investment being one of the key priorities of our recovery plan, the growth in jobs in the construction area is particularly encouraging.The February 2022 budget outlined a 30% increase in spending on public infrastructure over the next three years to R812 billion, compared to R627 billion over the past three years.
The Construction Industry Development Board recently noted that there has been an increase in infrastructure projects driven by state-owned enterprises like Transnet and Eskom, but also in the metros and through the Department of Public Works and Infrastructure.In June, this year we saw our economy return to pre-pandemic growth levels owing to a fairly positive GDP outcome in the first quarter of the year.
Naturally the objective is to move significantly off this low base, which is why we are continuing with our focus on structural reforms that drive growth.Government recently published a proposed amendment to remove the licensing threshold for electricity generation facilities and encourage investment in larger, utility scale projects to rapidly add new generation capacity to the grid.
This represents a major milestone in our efforts to transform the country’s energy landscape, a critical prerequisite for economic growth and attracting investment.
Since the national energy plan was announced in July this year, we have been working as government in partnership with various stakeholders on implementation and policy reform.Since we raised the licensing threshold to 100 megawatts in June 2021, more than 500 MW of private renewable power generation projects have been registered, with a pipeline of over 6,000 MW of projects at various stages of development.The structural reform process continues to register progress in support of economic growth and attracting investment.Economic growth cannot be realised and jobs cannot be created without undertaking the difficult but necessary structural reforms that will improve the business and investment climate.
This is government’s role.
However for success to be guaranteed, we will need to forge consensus between business, labour and civil society not only on the reforms that are needed, but on the trade-offs that are necessary to achieve our goals.
While our economy takes time to recover and our reform programme is implemented, we will continue to pursue a range of complementary interventions to support job creation.
Alongside the measures that supports private sector growth, we will expand public employment and ensure social protection for the most vulnerable.The growth in employment, together with other promising signs of recovery, should encourage us to push ahead with the reforms and implement our Economic Reconstruction and Recovery Plan to unlock investment and growth.
It should encourage all social partners to work more closely and with greater urgency and purpose to achieve faster growth and create more jobs.
Collect your driver's licence card
Vukuzenzele Unnamed
Motorists who applied for a new or renewal driver’s licence card or professional driving permit (PrDP) between October and December last year are being urged to collect them.
According to the Road Traffic Management Corporation (RTMC), only 42% of the 32 748 driver’s licence cards produced during this time have been collected.
Minister of Transport Fikile Mbalula opened the RTMC licensing centres in Midrand and Eco Park last year, in response to the backlog of expired driver’s licences due to COVID-19.The Driver’s Licence Card Account, which prints the licences, is working around the clock to fast-track production and remains on course to clear the backlog by the end of June.
The RTMC says people can check the status of their application before going to the testing centre to collect it.
This can be done by SMS or online.
Driver’s licence SMS query
For a driver’s licence query, applicants can SMS their ID number to 33214.
They will then receive one of the SMSes below:
• Application received: The application was received, but has not yet been processed.
• Production queue: The card is still being processed and manufactured.
• Produced and ready for collection: The card will be ready for collection in 21 days.
However, due to the high number of cards being processed, the RTMC advises you to wait 35 days before going to collect.
• Problem card: There is a problem with the production of your card.
Please return to the testing centre.
For a PrDP application query, SMS your ID number to 44220.
Driver’s licence online query
You can also determine the status of your application for free online.
• Visit online.natis.gov.za.
• Create a profile and log in.
• Click the status of your application on the dashboard.
Those whose licences expired between March 2020 and 31 August 2021, who missed the renewal deadline of 5 May, are advised to obtain a tempo rary driver’s licence when applying for their renewal to remain legally compliant.
While RTMC centres are open Monday to Sunday from 7am to 9pm, members of the public are encouraged to take advantage of shorter queues on Fridays and the weekend.
Rebuilding lives and livelihoods after the floods
Vukuzenzele Unnamed
It has been almost two months since heavy flooding wreaked havoc across parts of KwaZulu-Natal, the Eastern Cape and North West, causing extensive loss of life and damage to property and infrastructure.
I recently visited eThekwini in KwaZuluNatal to meet with business people in the city to lend our support to their efforts to restore their operations.
When this natural disaster struck, there was some concern that authorities had neither the capacity nor the will to respond efficiently and effectively to the dire situation of those who had lost everything.
Having paid my second visit to the city since the floods, I am clear that this concern was misplaced.
In KwaZulu-Natal, as in the Eastern Cape and North West, all stakeholders have been hard at work to recover from these tragic events.
The National Disaster Management Centre has been coordinating all spheres of government in their efforts to provide humanitarian relief to the many households that have been affected.
It has been pleasing to see the non-governmental organisation community, business and relief organisations joining in working with government to provide much-needed relief assistance.
All these stakeholders have provided food, clothes, blankets, dig nity packs and school uniforms to vulnerable families to meet their basic needs.
Sheltering services are currently being provided to over 7,000 people in the four most affected districts in KwaZuluNatal.
Work has started to build temporary residen-ces for affected families on state-owned land parcels have been identified in KwaZulu-Natal for possible resettlement.
The Departments of Home Affairs, Health and Social Development have been assisting affected communities to access important services.
For example, mobile units are helping those who lost critical documents in the floods to get new smart IDs and to re-issue birth certificates.
Mobile health services, including COVID-19 vaccinations, are being provided to people in areas where the physical facilities are not yet fully operational.
Mechanisms are in place to pay out the social grants of affected indivi duals.
Mobile classrooms are being procured so that learning and teaching should not be interrupted for longer than necessary in flood-affected schools.
Work is underway to repair damaged waste water treatment works, pump-stations and reticulation.
Damaged roads are being repaired.
Eighteen new bridges are planned as part of the Welisizwe Rural Bridges programme.
There has also been considerable progress in fixing key infrastructure supporting the Port of Durban.
Given the importance of the port to the national and continental economy, port traffic has been restored, terminal operations are back at full capacity and work to repair damaged rail infrastructure is underway.
Additional measures are being put in place to provide financial support to both big and small businesses in distress.
This is needed as a matter of urgency to ensure that businesses can stay afloat and that jobs can be sustained.
At different times in our democracy’s history, we have been confronted with events and circumstances that have severely tested the resolve of our people and the effectiveness of our institutions.
We have seen extraor dinary solidarity and support to affected communities in KwaZuluNatal, Eastern Cape and North West.
Municipal and provincial governments have been working closely with national departments and agencies to enable people to rebuild their lives and to get local economic activity back on track.
They have been working with all stakeholders in all of these areas to ensure that we effectively coordinate recovery efforts and that we plan and rebuild in a manner that is more resilient to extreme events of this nature in the future.
The perseverance of affected communities, their determination to succeed and their ability to rally together in times of crisis has been an inspiration.
We salute all those who have been part of the effort to help the people of the affected provinces.
As government, we are mobilising all available resources and undertaking every effort to ensure that, as we rebuild, no-one is left behind.
South Africa’s first veterinary nurses graduate
Allison Cooper
Being one of the country’s first veterinary nurse graduates is a dream come true for Randburg resident Phumelela Mthimkhulu (21), who has been passionate about animals since she was a child.
Mthimkhulu recently graduated from the University of Pretoria (UP), the only veterinary training facility in SA, with a Bachelor of Veterinary Nursing degree.
“It’s crazy to wrap my head around.
To know that I was part of the first class to do the bachelor’s degree, which has been years in the making, is an honour.
“I’m grateful for the opportunities and doors that will open for us nurses to further our studies and specialise within our profession, which was hard to do in the past,” she says.
Tamarin Fisher, the Pre sident of the Veterinary Nurses Association of South Africa, says this is the biggest milestone in the profession’s 42-year history.
“The new three-year degree will give qualified nurses the opportunity to enrol in postgraduate studies, which will hopefully culminate in the awarding of masters and PhD degrees.” Veterinarians treat animals’ injuries and illnesses, similar to how a doctor provides health treatment for people.
Veterinary nurses are essential in vets’ professional teams, says Mthimkhulu.
“Some of the vital skills a nurse has to display are patient care, client communication, assisting veterinarians with procedures, and anything that will help the veterinary hospital to function at its best.
“It’s one of the most rewarding professions.
If you want to be a veterinary nurse, don’t allow fear or a lack of knowledge to deter you from trying it out and enjoying it because it will change your life for the better,” says Mthimkhulu.
Bursaries to address skills shortageDue to a severe skills shortage in the sector, Mthimkhulu didn’t battle to find a job.
“I was lucky enough to secure a job at Fourways Veterinary Hospital during my final year.
I started working there about a month after my final exams and I’ve been enjoying every moment of it,” she says.
The Health and Welfare Sector Education and Training Authority (HWSETA) is committed to addressing the extreme skills shortage in the veterinary sector and ensuring transformation.
It recently launched a Veterinary Science Career Guidance Campaign, in partnership with the Department of Higher Education and Training, and will be visiting rural schools to encourage learners to consider veterinary services as a career path.
It also announced 60 bursaries to address the critical shortage of veterinarians and paraveterinarians in South Africa’s rural areas.
“The bursaries are specifically aimed at learners in rural areas as they can take their knowledge back to their homesteads,” says Dr Nomfundo Mnisi, the Chairperson of the HWSETA.
The Deputy Minister of Higher Education, Science and Innovation, Buti Manamela, welcomed the bursaries.
The UP’s Faculty of Vete rinary Science will assist the HWSETA in its marketing, bursary funding and recruitment campaigns.
“We will also assist the HWSETA in administering the bursaries, which were allocated for first-year veterinary science stu dents from the designated groups,” says Chris van Blerk, the Head of Communications and Media at UP’s Faculty of Veterinary Science.
He says youth hoping to follow in Mthimkhulu’s footsteps and register for a first bachelor’s degree at UP need to have completed their National Senior Certificate (NSC), or equivalent qualification, and meet minimum requirements.
“For the Bachelor of Veterinary Nursing degree, they need a minimum Admission Point Score of 28 and an NSC with English Home Language or English First Additional Language, mathematics, and physical sciences or life sciences,” he adds.
For more information about the sector, youth can contact private vete rinary practices or speak to Compulsory Community Service (CCS) veterinarians which are part of the Department of Agriculture, Land Reform and Rural Development (DALRRD) around the country.
“The CCS programme aims to provide accessible and affordable veterinary services to under-served and poor resourced areas within South Africa.
As such, vets in the programme will always serve as good information resources,” says Van Blerk.
Dreams come true for Tafelkop community
Vukuzenzele unnamed
A group of black farmers in Tafelkop in Grob lersdal, Limpopo are the proud owners of 189 hectares of land, which they have been farming for the past 25 years.
The 30 farmers received title deeds for the land from President Cyril Ramaphosa after the Department of Public Works and Infrastructure transferred it for land redistribution purposes.The land is valued at more than R25.5 million, but was handed over to the farmers for free.“This is indeed a great day for the community of Tafelkop, for the people of Limpopo and for the whole of South Africa.
“Today we are witnessing a community’s dream being fulfilled.
It is the vision that this community has spent the past 25 years fighting to see realised,” said the President at the handover ceremony.The farmers have been successfully farming various agricultural produce on the land since 1996.They organised themselves in the 1990s to be registered commercial farmers under the banner of the Tafelkop Farmers Association and started to engage government.In 2000, the then National Department of Agriculture entered into lease agreements with the Tafelkop Farmers Association in terms of the Land Redistribution for Agricultural Development Programme.In 2009, the former Limpopo Department of Agri culture recommended to the Department of Public Works that the land be transferred to the farmers.
The deeds were registered in the names of the farmers earlier this year.The land is currently being used to farm tobacco, cotton and fresh produce.Thirty-two households are supported by the land and farming activities which provide employment to 128 permanent workers and up to 320 seasonal workers.
Justice for the communityThe President said the com munity had endured many hardships over the years and the “title deeds bring justice to a dispossessed community”.
“We have not forgotten the dispossession, land theft and forced removals that the people of this community and many communities across the country had to endure.
“We have not forgotten the harsh legacy of farming here in Limpopo, where farm-dwellers were forced to be labour tenants on their forefathers’ land and not allowed to own land to feed their families or graze their animals.” He added that black farmworkers were exploited and abused in what was previously the Northern Transvaal.“We also recall how the apartheid government supported white farmers with equipment, technical support and access to credit to build their businesses, but black subsistence farmers struggled to survive.”Transforming the agricultural industryThe President said the trans fer of land inspires hope because it shows that with the right support and opportunities, the agricultural industry can be transformed for the benefit of the country.
“We celebrate our progress, because day by day our Land Reform Programme is gaining momentum.
“To date, government has redistributed over five million hectares of land, to-talling around 5 500 farms, to more than 300 000 beneficiaries.” So far, the land restitution process has benefited over two million land claimants and resulted in the transfer of around 2.7 million hectares.“Land reform isn’t just in the interests of redress, justice and social cohesion.
It is also about economic development.
Agriculture and the agriculture value chain can and must transform rural economies,” said President Ramaphosa.Government plans to establish a land and agrarian reform agency to fast-track land reform.“We are looking at how effective our past policies have been.
We are going to address this issue of land reform urgently.”Addressing past mistakesThe President said govern ment was working hard to correct what went wrong during the apartheid years and since the start of de mocracy.
“We do this in tribute to those who lived among us; who resided here.”Land reform is vital to improving the country’s food security, building an inclusive economy and providing a better future for all South Africans, added the President.He urged the Tafelkop farmers to use the land wisely and for the benefit of the community.“For me, today has been the best day in the office; to kick the soil and dust and see your produce.
“I have no doubt that with the commitment and energy of all involved, this project will continue to thrive,” he said.Chairperson of the Tafelkop Farmers Association Jerry Sefoloshe thanked government for making it possible for the farmers to become the owners of the land they have worked for decades.
President Cyril Ramaphosa with farmers from Tafelkop, Limpopo, who recently received title deeds for the land they farm.
SA strives to realise the vision of the Constitution
Vukuzenzele unnamed
Sixty years ago, on 31 May 1961, apartheid South Africa became a republic, cutting its ties with the British Empire.
While a ‘republic’ is general-ly defined as a state in which supreme power is held by the people and their elected representatives, this was not the case in South Africa.
The Constitution of the apartheid republic pledged allegiance to God, “who gath-ered our forebears together from many lands and gave them this as their own”.It was a Constitution written by and for a racial minority, and it used faith to justify tyranny.
It outlined the ad-ministration of government, providing that only white people were eligible to vote and serve as public represent-atives.
It contained no Bill of Rights.
The country’s majority was relegated to a footnote towards the end of its 121 provisions, in a section titled ‘Administration of Bantu Affairs, etc.’.
In a televised message, Prime Minister HF Verwoerd said: “We seek the gradual development of each of our groups in a certain direction.
Here the solution is openly sought by retaining the white man’s guiding hand.
“We are very happy to be a united people,” he declared to the world.
But the reality was that we were not a united people.
We were inhabitants of a country where one’s rights, prospects and life expectan-cy was determined by one’s race.
For two decades, the Repub-lic of South Africa Constitu-tion Act of 1961 was the legal impetus for the repression of nearly 90% of the South African population.
This unhappy anniversary took place in the same month that we celebrated the 25th anniversary of the adoption by the Constitutional Assem-bly of our new democratic Constitution, which became the birth certificate of a real united nation.Now we have one law for one nation.Together, we have chosen for ourselves a system of government that gives true meaning to the concept of a republic.We have said that in our democratic republic, every-one is equal before the law and has the right to equal protection and benefit of the law.South Africa today is a country where the admin-istration of justice is vested in independent courts and a judiciary that is subject only to the Constitution.
We live in a country where everyone has the right to approach the courts for the fulfilment of their rights.
We live in a country where communities can stake a le-gal claim on land they were forcefully moved from, and where individuals or fam-ilies are protected against arbitrary eviction from their homes.
We live in a country where everyone is permitted to freely practise their culture and traditions.
It is a country where anyone can freely protest in support of social, political and other causes anywhere.Our constitutional dispensa-tion is premised on account-able government, where the Executive is answerable to the people and where Parlia-ment is representative of the people.
It is a country where the law applies equally to any citizen.
We now have a government of the people, for the people and by the people.When the apartheid regime triumphantly paraded its racist Constitution to the world 60 years ago, it had misplaced confidence that it would endure.In an unanswered letter to Verwoerd a month before the republic was declared, Nelson Mandela affirmed the liberation movement’s rejec-tion of the forcibly imposed white republic.
He said that no Constitution or form of government decid-ed without the participation of the African people would enjoy moral validity.
Indeed no system that en-trenches the systematic de-nial of people’s rights can be sustained.
Though it would be over three decades before the demands of the liberation movement were met, we eventually won our freedom.
In relegating the apartheid Constitution to the dustbin of history, we committed our-selves to a new Constitution and a new set of values.
When I addressed the Constitutional Assembly 25 years ago, I said our Con-stitution must become more than words on a page; it must become a reality in the lives of our people.
Unless we do so, this pro-gressive and revolutionary document will be rendered irrelevant and meaningless.
We have long decided what kind of society we want to be.
It is a society rooted in human dignity, equality, freedom and non-discrimination.
For a quarter of a century we have worked to build such a society.
We have made undeniable progress, but we still have many challenges and there is much work still to be done.
As we mark the anniver-sary of the adoption of our democratic Constitution, let us remember what a decisive break it was with the system underpinned by racism, ex-ploitation, dispossession and oppression that had come before.
Let us also remember that it is up to us to make the vision contained in our Constitution a reality.
For it is only by ensuring that all South Africans are able to freely and fully ex-ercise their constitutional rights, that we will truly become a united people.
COVID-19 vaccines: Your questions answered
Allison Cooper
With South Af rica’s Corona virus Disease (COVID-19) vaccination programme now in full swing, Vuk’uzen zele has put together information from the Department of Health to help answer some common questions about the vaccine.
Q: Can the vaccine cause COVID-19 or make me test positive?A: None of the vaccines used in South Africa contain the live virus that causes COVID-19.
It does not cause the virus and you will not test positive after receiving the vaccine.Q: Is it true that there’s a microchip in the vaccines, that tracks people’s movements?A: There is no microchip or tracking device in the vaccines.
Vaccine manufacturers are required to declare the ingredients to the South African Health Products Regulatory Authority (SAHPRA) before the vaccine is approved for use.
Q: I have heard that vaccines have the mark of the Beast – 666.
Is this true?A: Vaccines have no connection with any religious organisations and cannot be infused with spirits, demons or other abstract ingredients.Q: Should I get vaccinated if I am pregnant?A: A pregnant woman is more likely to get ill from COVID-19.
Getting vaccinated can prevent a pregnant woman from being severely ill.Q: Should I stop breast feeding to get vaccinated?A: The World Health Organisation and the Department of Health do not recommend stopping breastfeeding in order to get vaccinated.
Vaccines are safe for use in breastfeeding mothers.Q: Can I get a vaccine soon after being infected with COVID-19?A: Anyone who has been infected with COVID-19 must wait at least 30 days from when their symptoms stop.
Q: I have COVID-19 symptoms, is it safe to get vaccinated?A: You should not get the vaccine if you have symptoms of COVID-19.
You should rather be tested.
Q: Can I get my second dose of the Pfizer vaccine earlier than 42 days after my first shot.A: You are only eligible for your second jab after 42 days.Q: Do I need to be vaccinated if I have recovered from COVID-19?
Can my body not fight the disease on its own, without suffering the side effects of the vaccine?A: Evidence shows that your body’s response, when you are sick from COVID-19, is much weaker and shorter than the response to the vaccine.
Getting the vaccine will give you a much stronger and longer-lasting immune response.
The side effects of the vaccine are mild and do not last more than a day or two, while getting sick from COVID-19 can cause hospitalisation or death.Q: Can people with chronic diseases, such as high blood pressure, get the vaccine?A: People with chronic diseases are at higher risk of getting severe COVID-19.
They will therefore benefit the most from getting the vaccine.
Q: If I previously had an allergic reaction to medication or a vaccine should I get the COVID-19 vaccine?A: Anyone with a history of allergic reactions to other vaccines or medicines should first speak to their health practitioner.
Q: How dangerous is an allergic reaction to the vaccine?A: Severe allergic reactions are rare.
An allergic reaction usually happens within seconds or minutes after getting the vaccine.
This is why all people must wait in the observation area for 15 minutes after their vaccine.Q: Is it safe to get the vaccine if you are allergic to eggs?A: Yes.
None of the COVID-19 vaccines have any egg proteins.Q: I have heard of elderly people dying shortly after getting the vaccine.
Is the vaccine safe for the elderly?A: The vaccine is safe and highly effective to prevent severe COVID-19 disease and death.
Through the use of the vaccine, there has been a huge drop in COVID-19 deaths in the elderly in several countries.Q: Why do some people still get COVID-19 within two weeks of getting the vaccine?A: You are only fully vaccinated 30 days after get ting the Johnson & Johnson vaccine or two weeks after the second dose of the Pfizer vaccine.
If you are exposed to the virus before you are fully vaccinated, you may get the disease.
Q: Does the vaccine completely prevent COVID-19 infection?A: No.
Even after you are fully vaccinated you can still get COVID-19.
However, the vaccine reduces risk of severe COVID-19 infection, hospitalisation and death.
vFor more informa-tion go to https://sacoronavirus.co.za
BRICS key to SA's growth
vukuzenzele unnamed
A year before the first democratic elections, President Nelson Mandela wrote an article in Foreign Policy magazine on the new South Africa’s future foreign policy.
Reflecting on the shifts in global alliances brought about by the end of the Cold War, he wrote that countries would have to “recast their nets” if they were to reap any benefit from internatio-nal affairs.
Since the tectonic shift of 1994 when we made a decisive break with not just apartheid but the interna-tional relations outlook of its architects, South Africa’s foreign policy continues to be characterised by this “recasting the net”.
Our foreign policy priorities are regional political and economic integration, pursing African development, multilateral engagement and the pro-motion of democracy, peace and human rights.
To this end, we have forged strategic alliances with both the countries of the Global South and mutually beneficial coope-ration with the countries of the North.
Joining the BRICS group of countries in 2010 was a milestone in our quest to advance our own national development priorities by forging stronger ties with the important emerging economies of Brazil, Russia, India and China.Put into context, BRICS countries comprise roughly 41% of the world’s popula-tion and account for around 24% of global GDP and some 16% of global trade.
We have reaped the bene-fits of membership of this important bloc, most nota-bly in the area of economic cooperation.
Bilateral trade has grown, particularly with China and India, with commodity exports and manufactured goods imports featuring strongly.
The BRICS countries continue to be important sources of foreign direct investment in key such as mining, automo-tive, transportation, clean energy, financial services and IT.
A 2018 review of our BRICS membership by professional services firm Deloitte noted that BRICS partners “invested three times more capital in the country compared to the seven years prior to 2011”.
These investments and projects have in turn led to significant job creation.
Since the formation of the New Development Bank, whose regional office is located in Johannesburg, South Africa has been a beneficiary of financing and technical support for projects in transportation, clean energy, environmental protection, water infrastruc-ture and greenhouse gas emissions reduction.
Since the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic, South Africa has received $2 billion in funding from the New Development Bank under the COVID-19 Emer-gency Loan Programme to fight the pandemic and to support our economic recovery.
There has also been substantial cooperation with our BRICS partners in securing personal protective equipment and cooperation around vaccine access and distribution.
We recently participated in the 13th BRICS Summit, where BRICS countries agreed to deepen coopera-tion to fight COVID-19 and mobilise the political sup-port and financial resources needed to respond to future pandemic preparedness.
This includes the esta-blishment of a virtual BRICS Vaccine Research and Development Centre and a BRICS Integrated Early Warning System to forecast future outbreaks of infecti-ous diseases.
Another important area of agreement was on mutual recognition of national documents of vaccination and systems of COVID-19 testing – something that will be vital to cross-border travel in the future.
The concept of mutually beneficial cooperation will be particularly important in the global economic recovery, where unequal development means that some countries will bounce back quickly, while others will lag behind.
In support of economic recovery, BRICS partners agreed to strengthen colla-boration in catalytic sectors such as energy, IT, science, technology and innovation, agriculture and the green economy.
These are all important sectors identified in our Economic Recon-struction and Recovery Plan announced last year.
Cooperation with other BRICS countries, particularly in the field of innovation research, will help to accelerate our country’s industrialisation and help us meet our Fourth Industrial Revolution aspi-rations.
In this regard, discus-sions were held around the creation of formal BRICS platforms to share best practice, knowledge and expertise, including the use of open source technology platforms.The BRICS partners agreed that developing countries need assistance to achieve the UN Sustainable Deve-lopment Goals, and that donor countries should honour their commitments in this regard.
This is parti-cularly important within the context of climate action.
Like most countries, South Africa seeks to move towards a low-carbon development path that is inclusive, sustainable and that takes into account our status as a developing country.
The BRICS Energy Research Cooperation Platform will be valuable as we move to diversify our energy sources.
In the 11 years since we joined BRICS, our mem-bership has substantially advanced our national interest.
Being a member of BRICS has enhanced our position as an important emerging economy.
It has given us access to policy and technical exper-tise of larger and established economies, as well as access to the support of the Natio-nal Development Bank.It has strengthened our activism on the global stage, particularly around reform of multilateral institutions.
We have benefitted from being part of a collective voice striving to advance a world order based on mutual respect and the equal sovereignty of nati-ons.
BRICS is of immense strategic importance to our country and will continue to be so for some time to come.
South Africa acts to address ventilator shortage
Silusapho Nyanda
A LOCALLY developed ventilator will help patients with mild COVID-19 symptoms to breathe easier.
The fight against the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) in South Africa has been boosted with the production of the first ventilator made in the country.
The Continuous Positive
Airway Pressure (CPAP) ventilator helps patients with mild symptoms of COVID-19 to breathe easier by providing a mild level of oxygenated air pressure to keep their airways open.The ventilator was de-signed by the Council for Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR) in collabo-ration with a number of local partners and will be rolled out nationwide to patients showing respiratory distress in the early phase of COV-ID-19 infection.“The air a person normally breaths has a 23 percent con-centration of oxygen.
The CPAP ventilator can pump a higher amount of oxygen, helping a person breathe.
The CPAP pumps continu-ous concentrated oxygen.
You can increase or decrease the amount of oxygen one is breathing in,” says Executive Manager of CSIR Future Production: Manufacturing Martin Sanne.Patients using the ventilator are connected via a face mask.
Oxygen is drawn from an oxygen gas tank and is mixed with natural air in the ventilator, from where it is transmitted to the mask and breathed in by the patient.
Sanne says that in addition to pumping oxygenated air, the CPAP also helps patients exhale.The CPAP device can be used in both high-tech clinical environments and temporary settings, such as field hospitals and quarantine facilities.
Sanne says the CSIR will have produced 10 000 ventilators by the end of August.
Working with Siemens, Simera, Akacia, Gabler, Umoya and the University of Cape Town, the CSIR produced the CPAP according to World Health Organisation standards.The first batch of ventilators will be given to state hospitals experiencing pressure due to the unavailability of equipment to deal with COVID-19.The CSIR started working on the CPAP after the world began experiencing an extreme shortage in ventilators.
“Around March and April, there suddenly became a short supply of ventilators from our international suppliers.
Where you could get them, they were very expensive so government issued a tender for the production of ventilators,” says Sanne.The tender was part of the government’s National Ventilator Project within the Department of Trade, Industry and Competition.The CSIR is also working on a Bi-level Positive Airway Pressure ventilator aimed at helping patients with more severe symptoms of COVID-19.
The ventilator will assist with both inhalation and exhalation, either in fixed pressure modes or by sensing the oxygen sup-ply required by a patient and adjusting the pressure accordingly.
Crew Juliet firefighter shares her story
Dale Hes
Young firefighter Vuyiseka Arendse (26) is part of Crew Juliet, South Africa’s first all-female wildland firefighting team.
Her strength and determination to make a name for herself in the male-dominated world of firefighting is a true inspiration to all women.
Arendse grew up in the small Western Cape town of Beaufort West.
After school, she tried studying at a college in Oudtshoorn, but decided to move back home to support her family.
She worked at a supermarket for a while, but then firefighting caught her eye.
“I saw the firefighters in their uniforms and the big red trucks.
I immediately became interested and wanted to find out more,” says Arendse.
Arendse was one of the graduates of the Western Cape government’s Chrysalis Academy youth development programme in 2016.
After the programme, she worked at the fire station in Beaufort West, earning only R1 900 per month.
But then she came across an opportunity offered by NCC Environmental Ser-vices last year.
“I was at Chrysalis Acade-my as a facilitator when NCC came to talk to the students about the opportunity to ap-ply for training for the first all-female wildland firefight-ing team.
Even though I was not one of the students, I was very interested and applied for the training, and I was accepted,” Arendse says.
Arendse went through the training, which combined theory and practical aspects of firefighting.
“I learnt so much.
For one, I didn’t know that there were firefighters tasked with putting out wildfires.
I had previously thought they only worked in towns to put out fires in buildings,” she says.
Arendse adds that it was an amazing feeling to pass the training and become part of the first all-female firefight-ing team of its kind.
“I felt very excited, espe-cially because when I had told people I wanted to be a firefighter, many of them said I could not do it because I am a woman and would not cope with the job.
This pushed me to show them that I can actu-ally do it, not only for myself but for the rest of the women in South Africa.”Arendse says that fighting her first major fire in Noor-dhoek was a challenging but highly rewarding experience.
“It was my first full 24-hour shift and the first time we were working with all the other male firefighters.
It was tiring and very hot in our protective gear but we finished the job and the feeling afterwards was very rewarding.”Arendse encourages the women of South Africa to never underestimate them-selves.
“Don’t be defined by what people say you can and can’t do.”
WOMEN must blaze a trail, says firefighter.
To check for more opportunities offered by NCC Environmental Services, follow their Facebook page.
You can also call them on 021 702 2884 (Cape Town), 010 007 5272 (Gauteng), 031 003 2964 (KwaZulu-Natal) or 041 101 1033 (Eastern Cape).
Young firefighter Vuyiseka Arendse is part of South Africa’s first all-women firefighting team.
Help stop the spread of COVID-19
vukuzenzele unnamed
Our nation is con fronted by the gravest crisis in the history of our democracy.
For more than 120 days, we have succeeded in delaying the spread of a virus that is causing devastation across the globe.
But now, the surge in infec-tions that we had been advised by our medical experts would come, has arrived.
More than a quarter of a million South Africans have been infected with coronavirus, and we know that many more infections have gone undetected.
We are now recording over 12,000 new cas-es every day.
Since the start of the outbreak in March, at least 4,079 people have died from COVID-19.
Like the massive cold fronts that sweep into our country from the South Atlantic at this time of year, there are few parts of the country that will remain untouched by the coronavirus.
The coronavirus storm is far fiercer and more destructive than any we have known before.
It is stretching our resources and our resolve to their limits.
The surge of infections that our experts and scientists predicted over 3 months ago has now arrived.
It started in the Western Cape and is now underway in the Eastern Cape and Gauteng.Yet, while infections rise expo-nentially, it is important to note that our case fatality rate of 1.5 percent is among the lowest in the world.
This is compared to a global average case fatality rate of 4.4 percent.
We owe the relatively low number of deaths in our country to the experience and dedication of our health professionals and the urgent measures we have taken to build the capacity of our health system.
Even as most of our people have taken action to prevent the spread of the virus, there are others who have not.
There are some among us who ignore the regulations that have been passed to combat the disease.
In the midst of such a pan-demic, getting into a taxi with-out a face mask, gathering to meet friends, attending parties or even visiting family, can too easily spread the virus and cost lives.
This may be a disease that is caused by a virus, but it is spread by human conduct and behaviour.
Through our own actions – as individuals, as families, as communities – we can and we must change the course of this pandemic in our country.
We need to wear a cloth mask that covers our nose and mouth whenever we leave home.
We must continue to regularly wash our hands with soap and water or sanitiser.
We must continue to clean and sanitise all surfaces in all public spac-es.
Most importantly, we must keep a safe distance – of at least 2 metres – from other people.
There is now emerging evi-dence that the virus may also be carried in tiny particles in the air in places that are crowded, closed or have poor air circulation.
For this reason we must immediately improve the indoor environment of public places where the risk of infection is greatest.
Our decision to declare a nation-wide lockdown pre-vented a massive early surge of infections when our health services were less prepared, which would have resulted in a far greater loss of lives.
In the time that we had, we have taken important meas-ures to strengthen our health response.
We have conducted more than two million coro-navirus tests and community health workers have done more than 20 million screenings.
We have made available al-most 28,000 hospital beds for COVID-19 patients and have constructed functional field hospitals across the country.
We now have over 37,000 quarantine beds in private and public facilities across the coun-try, ready to isolate those who cannot do so at home.We have procured and de-livered millions of items of personal protective equipment to hospitals, clinics and schools across the country to protect our frontline workers.
We have re-cruited and continue to recruit additional nurses, doctors and emergency health personnel.
We continue to make progress in our efforts to deal with COV-ID 19, but our greatest challenge still lies ahead.
Across all prov-inces, we are working to further increase the number of general ward and critical beds available for COVID-19 patients.
Ward capacity is being freed up in a number of hospitals by delaying non-urgent care, the conversion of some areas of hospitals into additional ward space and the erection or expansion of field hospitals.
We are working to increase supplies of oxygen, ventilators and other equipment for those who will need critical care, in-cluding by diverting the supply of oxygen from other purpos-es.
We are deploying digital technologies to strengthen the identification, tracing and isolation of contacts, and to provide support to those who test positive.
As we now approach the peak of infections, we need to take extra precautions and tighten existing measures to slow down the rate of transmission.
Regulations on the wearing of masks will be strengthened.
Employers, shop owners and managers, public transport operators, and managers and owners of any other public building are now legally obliged to ensure that anyone entering their premises or ve-hicle must be wearing a mask.
Taxis undertaking local trips will now be permitted to increase their capacity to 100 percent, while long distance taxis will not be allowed to exceed 70 percent occupancy, on condition that new risk mitigation protocols related to masks, vehicle sanitising and open windows are followed.
There is now clear evidence that the resumption of alcohol sales has resulted in substantial pressure being put on hospitals, including trauma and ICU units, due to motor vehicle accidents, violence and related trauma.
We have therefore de-cided that in order to conserve hospital capacity, the sale, dispensing and distribution of alcohol will be suspended with immediate effect.
As an additional measure to reduce the pressure on hos-pitals, a curfew will be put in place between the hours of 9pm and 4am.
We are taking these measures fully aware that they impose unwelcome restrictions on peo-ple’s lives.
They are, however, necessary to see us through the peak of the disease.
There is no way that we can avoid the coronavirus storm.
But we can limit the damage that it can cause to our lives.
As a nation we have come together to support each other, to pro-vide comfort to those who are ill and to promote acceptance of people living with the virus.
Now, more than ever, we are responsible for the lives of those around us.
We will weather this storm.
We will restore our country to health and to prosperity.
We shall overcome.
Young people are SA's real jewels
vukuzenzele unnamed
Engaging with young people always leaves me energised.
It is exciting to gain insight into their struggles and triumphs and their vision for what can be done to improve this country.There is no denying that youth are a significant presence in our nation’s psyche and fabric.
Far from the perception that they are complacent, politically apathetic or self-absorbed, local and international studies consistently affirm that young people around the globe are always more positive about their prospects.
According to the findings of an Ipsos Pulse of the People poll released in January, 61% of South Africans aged 15 to 17 feel optimistic about 2020.I have no doubt this is a sentiment shared by youth in general and especially the cohort born at the turn of the millennium who are now beginning their adult life, the ones the youth call Ama2000.They are the sons and daughters born after democracy.
While they have no direct experience of the atrocities of apartheid, they continue to live with its legacy of racial inequity, spatial injustice and poverty.
These young people are confident, self-assured and brimming with ambition.
They know their rights and aren’t afraid to demand them.
Our country’s youth represent energy, hope, fun, poten tial, future and freedom.
They are digital natives fluent in the use of modern technologies and look to enter careers that did not even exist at the time of their parents.
On the eve of the State of the Nation Address I had the privilege of interacting with a group of such dynamic young people at an intergenerational dialogue convened by the National Youth Development Agency.
We discussed the issues that are most important to young people and examined ways in which we could align our perspectives and actions.
Naturally, access to employment and opportunities dominated the agenda.
Of the 1.2 million young people entering the labour market each year, almost two-thirds remain neither working nor studying.
The participants in the dialogue welcomed the fact that the issue of youth employment was receiving attention at the highest levels of government.
But the refrain was familiar: they were ready and able to contribute to the economy in various ways, including as entrepreneurs, but bureaucratic red tape and lack of funding prevents them from doing so.
As Bright Hlongwane from Youth in Business South Africa told me, there needs to be more funding extended to young entrepreneurs.
They would like to see a variety of financial institutions, developmental financial institutions, angel investors, private equity firms as well as commercial banks extending credit and taking a bet on young entrepreneurs.
For our country to prosper and thrive we must do all within our means to ensure young people can participate in our economy in a meaningful way, whether it is in formal employment or self-employment.
It was therefore fitting that I could use this platform to launch the Presidential Youth Employment Intervention, which is a strategic national vision and plan which sets out priority actions to address youth unemployment.
This includes a national pathway management network that matches candidates with work opportunities.
This will enable young people to have access to opportunities as some of them do not have the networks that make easy access to opportunities possible.
Specialised short focused courses in skills that employers need now will be organ ised.
This aims to address the problem of a mismatch between the existing educational, training and develop ment programmes and the requirements of the economy.
We welcome the work already being done in this area, such as the programme currently underway through the departments of Agriculture, Land Reform and Rural Development and Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs to train 1,000 young students in the Free State in agricultural and other skills.
Many young people want to start their own businesses.
They lack the technical skills that can help them start their own businesses.
The intervention will support the growth of youth entrepreneurs.
Entrepreneurship is certainly not a panacea, but I am convinced that it is one effective and proven way to confer identity and purpose, a sense of belonging, and hope for the future for the youth.
The Presidential Youth Service Programme provides opportunities for young people to give back to their communities.
This initiative is designed to effect change and make an impact at scale, as opposed to fragmented programmes that have had limited impact.
I also announced in the State of the Nation Address that we will set aside 1% of the national budget for a youth employ ment initiative.
A number of programmes and projects are being designed to address this national challenge.
The youth of our country clearly see this as a land of opportunity and promise, despite the obstacles they encounter.
In the past week alone I have met several young South Africans who make me proud of just how far we have come and what we have achieved.
There are young sports people like golfing prodigy Sim ‘Tiger’ Tshabalala who is racking up international golfing awards at the tender age of 8.
He is ranked 7th in the world in his age group and has won the US Kids golf tournament twice.
My spirits were lifted when Grade 11 learner Sinoyolo Qumba from Orange Farm wrote to me about what should be in this year’s SONA.
She actually joined our speechwriting team in the drafting process.
There are passionate activists like Ayakha Melithafa from Eerste Rivier in the Western Cape, who attended this year’s World Economic Forum in Davos to call on world leaders to stand firmly for climate justice.
I was bowled over when I met Michelle Nkamankeng who, at 11 years old, is Africa’s youngest author and is ranked among the top ten youngest writers in the world.
The author of seven books and wrote her first book at the age of 6 years old.
As Professor Jonathan Jansen said: “She is confident, articulate, insightful and passionate.” It is these young people who are the real jewels of our country’s future and who remind us that our freedom was won through the sacrifices of the young men and women who were determined that not only they, but those who came after, should live in the light of freedom.
We must continue to work together as government, business, labour and civil society to ensure that the burden of unemployment does not continue to weigh down our young people, crush their spirits and cause them to become despondent.
I am confident that the actions we outlined in the SONA will represent a new frontier for youth development As Frantz Fanon said, it is to each generation to discover its mission.
This generation has discovered theirs.
It is now up to us to support them to fulfil it.
It is a historical fact that a nation’s failure to successfully nurture and enhance the capabilities of its youth spells doom for the future of that country.
Plan your finances wisely
Dr Rufaro Mucheka
The new year is an opportunity for a fresh start, to set meaningful goals, create new habits and adjust your past financial spending habits to ensure a more sustainable future.
The economic conditions for 2020 look likely to be even tougher than in 2019, so it is imperative that you take a hard and objective look at your personal finances.
Achieving financial independence is an admirable goal, but very few people know where to start.
Having a few good financial habits in place will help you set your new year up for success.In order to ensure that you achieve your financial goals, you can adopt SMART goals for a financially secure future.
This means setting goals that are:
• Specific • Measurable • Achievable • Relevant • Time-bound.
In addition, it is important that you plan your finances carefully.
Here are some tips to help you along:Set your financial goals Reflect on your financial discipline in 2019 and set new goals for 2020.
Settle your debts Put any spare funds or bonuses and salary increases towards eliminating debt, as paying off debt quicker could save you a significant amount of interest.Adjust your budget as needed As you track your spending habits, make necessary adjustments to your budget, increase your savings and decrease your spend ing.
If you receive a salary increase, allocate some to your savings rather than increasing your lifestyle spending.Review your insurance policies – Eval uate your life, health, disability and short-term insurance to ensure that the amounts match your needs.
Freely talk with your spouse about money There is a tendency for spouses to hide financial issues from each other.
Have monthly meetings to discuss budgets, your financial goals and what you both want for the future.
Take time to build a shared vision of what you want your future together to look like.
Reduce your entertainment budget Find free activities, such as parks, libraries and things to do in your neighbourhood.
There are plenty of ways to have fun without spending money.
Tips to help you stick to the planSticking to your financial plan is not always easy, but aim to:
• Regularly check your bank accounts – evaluate your spending.• Be prepared for setbacks.• Stay clear of unplanned debt.• Make smart purchases.
Ask yourself: Do I really need this?
Is this part of my financial plan?
• Meet with a financial advisor if you have no idea where to start.Khangelani Sibiya makes maths fun for learners.
SET YOUR FINANCIAL GOALS*Dr Rufaro Mucheka (PhD) is a Certified Financial Planner and Head of Strategy and Rest Of Africa at Nedbank Financial Planning.
BMW joins the fight against GBV
Vukuzenzele unnamed
BMW Group South Africa has handed over five BMW i3 cars that will be used by community-based care workers to reach victims of gender-based violence.The vehicles were received by President Cyril Ramaphosa and German Chancellor Angela Merkel before being hand ed over to the South African Business Coalition on Health and Aids (SABCOHA) to manage on behalf of the multi-sectoral Interim Steering Committee on gender-based violence and femicide (GBVF).The automotive group’s contribution demonstrates the growing partnership between government and civil society, which includes the business sector and international partners, in the fight against GBVF.The initiative is part of the Automotive Industry Transformation Fund (worth R6 billion), which was established to increase participation in the sector by previously and historically disadvantaged groups, including women, youth and people with disabilities.Speaking at the vehicle handover ceremony, held at the BMW Group production plant in Rosslyn, Tshwane, President Ramaphosa said the vehicles will help to save lives.
He expressed his gratitude to BMW for being the first company to donate the vehicles, and encouraged others to follow suit.“This practical expression of good corporate citizenship is sending a very good and clear message that we would like many other companies to also notice and adopt,President Ramaphosa said.Emergency response plan to address GBVFGovernment has been im plementing an emergency response plan to address GBVF.A National Strategic Plan on GBVF, which outlines a range of measures to tackle GBVF, has also been developed.“The plan focuses on strengthening prevention efforts, and ensuring safety and justice for the women and children of our country.
The plan also touches on economic empowerment, an area that is so important that we, as government, will be focusing on,” President Ramaphosa said.Group Head of Production and chairman of BMW South Africa, Dr Milan Nedeljkovic, said 4 000 people in South Africa are directly employed at BMW Group, and four out of five managers are local.In addition to this, more than 40 000 people are employed indirectly through the company’s utilities in South Africa.“Our first formal training facility in BMW SA opened its doors in 1978 and since then, more than 2 000 have gone through training with BMW and received jobs at BMW," Nedeljkovic said.
He said the company’s philosophy underlines that education is the key to success, and “life-long learning through BMW Group is part of that success”.“By 2025, we will support one million children and young people globally through targeted education programmes, focusing on skills programmes.”
From domestic worker to doctor
Nonkululeko Mathebula
Former domestic worker, Pamela Phumzile Sithole is proof that dreams do come true.
Born and raised in Phoe -nix in KwaZulu-Natal, the 24-year-old was able to juggle her studies with part-time work over the years having the ability to rise above her circumstances.
Despite working as a do mestic helper from the age of 14, Sithole’s perseverance and determination helped turn her life around and she recently graduated with a Bachelor of Medicine and Bachelor of Surgery degree from the University of Kwa Zulu-Natal.
She is currently doing her internship at the Rahima Moosa Mother and Child Hospital in Johannesburg.
Sharing her story with Vuk’uzenzele the inspirational
SOEs must drive economic growth and transformation
vukuzenzele unnamed
For some years now, South Africa’s state-owned enterprises (SOEs) have mostly been associated in the public eye with state capture, financial mismanagement and inefficiency.
In addition to needing regular bailouts from government, some of the country’s biggest and most important state-owned com-panies have been struggling to meet their mandates.
These SOEs should be at the forefront of economic and social transformation.
They are responsible for providing the infrastructure and the services on which the economy depends, whether it be in the generation of elec-tricity, commuter transport, water provision, freight logis-tics or telecommunications.Our approach to state ownership is informed by the need for the effective functioning of key network industries, such as energy and ports, and by the need to ensure that the basic needs of all South Africans, particu-larly the poor, can be met.
We firmly believe that public ownership is neces-sary in critical sectors of the economy and that the coun-try needs robust SOEs that are able to drive economic growth and transformation.This is particularly the case in the delivery of public goods such as electricity and water, where SOEs are able to pursue a developmental mandate in the public interest as opposed to a purely commercial one.That is why we have made it a priority of this government to turn these companies around to root out corruption, improve their governance and enable them to play the role they should in driving economic growth and employment creation.To this end, we have embarked upon a number of reforms to strengthen these SOEs so that they can produce the results that the country needs and expects.
One of the most important reforms is in the energy sector.
We have begun the process of restructuring Eskom into three different SOEs, responsible for gen-eration, transmission and distribution, respectively.
This is because the previous structure of Eskom was ill-suited for a changing ener-gy landscape.
It had become inefficient and costly and was not sufficiently transparent.
The establishment of a trans-mission entity in particular will mean that Eskom will be able to purchase power from a broader range of providers, both private and public.
This will improve transparency, increase competitiveness and promote the purchase of lowest-cost electricity.
Through the Renewable Energy Independent Pow-er Producers Programme, there has been significant private investment in en-ergy generation.
With the proposal to raise the licenc-ing exemption for embedded generation – where compa-nies produce electricity for themselves and other com-mercial users – from 1MW to 100MW, we can expect even more private investment.
This is vital at a time when the country is suffering from severe and sustained electricity shortages and where neither Eskom nor the state is able to invest in new generation capacity.Importantly, these reforms will give Eskom the space to address its financial and operational challenges.Another critical reform is the establishment of the National Ports Au-thority as an independent subsidiary of Transnet.This a crucial part of Trans-net’s broader strategy to revi-talise our logistics infrastruc-ture.
Transnet plans to invest R100 billion over the next five years in upgrading its infra-structure across the ports sys-tem.
This will make our ports more efficient and our ex-ports more competitive, and benefit the entire economy.For the ordinary consumer, it will mean reduced prices in the long term for many of our goods.
For our exporters, it will mean greater compet-itiveness in global markets.As our exports grow, our economy will expand and create more jobs.
More efficient ports will make the entire economy work better – and as port volumes increase, jobs will be created at the ports themselves.Establishing the National Ports Authority as a Trans-net subsidiary with its own board will, among other things, mean that revenues generated by the ports can be used to replace old equipment and upgrade and expand our ports, work which has been delayed for more than a decade.
Among other things, these reforms will encourage great-er private investment in the country’s economic infra-structure.
Some people have expressed concerns that this will diminish the importance or reduce the value of SOEs.
In fact, the contrary is true.
These reforms will ensure that while strategic infra-structure remains firmly in state hands, our SOEs will become more efficient and the industries they support will become more competi-tive.
Equally, these reforms are important to ensure that SOEs implement their broader developmental mandates to support all citizens and the economy.
Our policy remains that SOEs must play a crucial developmental role in sup-porting the growth of our economy.
Our task is to place them on a sound foot-ing, so that they can serve their ultimate shareholders – the South African people.
Prevent identity theft
Kgaogelo Letsebe
Shenki Mabitsela (28) is all too aware of identity theft and the crimes relating to it, as he has been a victim of it.
Mabitsela, from Modimolle in Limpopo, applied for a loan at a bank in November 2020, but was told he was over-indebted and didn’t qualify.
“I went to apply for a short-term loan as I needed to make ends meet after being retrenched in June 2020.
To my surprise, I was told I did not qualify.
“I initially thought it was because of my unstable income, but it wasn’t.
I knew I only had one clothing account and no other debt, so I asked for a printout of my profile,” he says.
Mabitsela saw that two cellphone contracts, a R65 000 bank loan and numerous re tail shop accounts had been opened in his name.
The debt was close to R100 000.
“Just before the national level 5 lockdown, I lost my ID book.
I thought it was somewhere in the house and wasn’t too worried because I had my smart card ID,” he says.
After realising that someone was creating debt in his name, Mabitsela opened a case of stolen identity at the South African Police Service (SAPS).
He had to write an affidavit stating that he lost his identity book and take it to credi tors with his case number to avoid being blacklisted.
Mabitsela’s experience is not unique.
According to the South African Fraud Prevention Service’s (SAFPS) 2020 fraud report, last year fraud increased by 161% in the Eastern Cape and 120% in Gauteng.Manie van Schalkwyk, the Executive Director of the SAFPS, says: “The most worrying is that impersonation fraud – otherwise known as identity fraud – has increased by an alarming 337%.” Van Schalkwyk says people must report a lost or stolen ID book or passport immediately.
“Reporting the loss or theft to the SAFPS and the SAPS ensures that we are able to enter the details on our database and inform our members.
They can then take additional care when confirming an identity.”
Early childhood development holds the key to our future
vukuzenzele unnamed
There are few pre sidential activities more fulfilling than spending a morning in the company of small children.
I recently attended the opening of the Little Flower early childhood development (ECD) centre in Bizana in the Eastern Cape, where I got to spend time with some of the future leaders of our country, reading to them and listening to them.The centre was recently built by the development organisation Impande South Africa through the support of the Nelson Mandela Foundation.I was deeply touched by the dedication of the centre’s staff to supporting the community and its children.
They told me how in the centre’s earliest days, staff struggled to get paid and yet still came to work.
They also told me that even if families are not able to pay the R20 fee for their child, the children are not turned away.The commitment of the ECD centre staff is so important because early childhood development centres play a pivotal role in our nation’s development.
These centres can be found in every village, town and city in the country.
Most were started by women in the community to support parents who need their children to be cared for when they are at work.
Many of these centres began as creches and day-care facilities.
Many have subsequently grown and expanded to incorporate a basic learning curriculum into their services.As government, we have taken up the task to improve the standards of care and make resources available for ECD centres to run suitable activities for young children to prepare them for formal education.
In April 2022, we completed the move of the ECD function from the Department of Social Development to the Department of Basic Education.
This is to link early childhood development to the formal school curriculum and to provide training, education and development to staff in ECD centres around the country.Because this foundational learning is key to a child’s success in later years, the Basic Education Laws Amendment Bill that is currently before Parliament proposes that it be com-pulsory for all children to receive two years of ECD before they enter Grade 1.
It is at this stage that children should be taught, learn through play and receive at least one meal a day.Early childhood development centres don’t just prepare our country’s youngest citizens to succeed in school; they are also an important source of entrepreneurship and job creation.
These centres are an important part of the care economy.
They sustain livelihoods, especially for women, which contributes to job creation in many communities.When the COVID-19 pandemic struck, ECD centres were hard hit.
Facilities that rely on school fees to keep running were unable to pay their staff and many parents who lost their jobs were unable to keep their children enrolled.In response, government established the ECD Employment Stimulus Relief Fund to help ECD centres that had lost income as a result of the pandemic and to enable them to recover.Preparing our youngest citizens with the tools they need to succeed in life is a responsibility we must collectively shoulder.
We must continue to do all we can, as government, the private sector and development organisations, to support early childhood development.With the many valuable services it provides, whether it is educating our children, providing childcare for working parents or creating opportunities for entrepreneurs, ECD makes a huge contribution to the achievement of many of our developmental goals.Since the care economy is mainly driven by women, such support goes a long way towards helping women, especially in disadvantaged communities, to become financially secure and independent.The young children in these centres are the next generation of South Africans who must be able to live up to their full potential as responsible, capable and outstanding citizens.They must be able to pursue their dreams so that we all may achieve our shared dream of a free, prosperous and happy nation.
How to save water
More Matshediso
The reliability of water supply by municipalities to households across South Africa is only at 68%, despite the strides made by the Department of Water and Sanitation to eradicate water supply backlogs over the years.
Water and Sanitation Deputy Minister David Mahlobo says this is due to old infrastructure, lack of operation and maintenance on water schemes, and the poor integration between housing programmes and current infrastructure development projects.“It is a major concern that the provision of reliable supply water is showing signs of decline,” he says.
As a water scarce country, South Africa ranks among 30 driest countries in the world.
Most of the country’s water comes from rainfall, but with the recorded average rainfall that is 40% less than the annual world average, the country is often affected by drought.However, the department has water saving tips for you.
Saving water in your home or business• Turn the tap off¬ between washing your face, brushing your teeth or shaving.• Taking a five-minute shower a day instead of a bath will use a third of the water used bathing in a bath tub, saving up to 400 litres a week.• Showering can use up to 20 litres of water per minute, whereas taking a bath can use between 80 and 150 litres of water per bath.
If you prefer to bath, do not fill up the bathtub.• Avoid flushing the toilet unnecessarily.
Dispose of tissues, insects and other waste in the trash rather than the toilet.
Every time you flush the toilet, 12 litres of water is used.• Fix a leaking toilet otherwise it can waste up to 100 000 litres of water in one year.• Use “grey water” — used water from baths, washing machines and other safe sources to flush your toilet.• Do not overfill or excessively backwash your swimming pool.• Kettles should not be filled to the brim but with just enough water for your needs.
This will reduce your electricity bill too.• Use a bucket rather than a hose to wash your car.
If you have to use a hose, use a sprayer that can be turned off¬ in-between spraying the car.
Using a garden hose could use as much as 30 litres of water per minute.• Farmers must ensure that they keep toxic insecticides away from water sources and streams.• People living in rural areas should be careful not to use the river or riverbank as a toilet.In the garden• Always water your plants during the early morning hours or in the evening, when temperatures are cooler.• Every time you boil an egg, save the cooled water for your houseplants.
They will benefit from the nutrients released from the shell.• Roof water can also be profitably stored in tanks, for watering gardens.• Use “grey water”-used water from baths, washing machines and other safe sources-to water your garden.
Court support for GBV victims
More Matshediso
If you have suffered gender-based violence (GBV) and are in need of support at court, the National Prosecuting Authority (NPA) has a specialised service to assist you.
The Ke Bona Lesedi Court Preparation Programme is available at most Sexual Offences Courts and other courts that deal with GBV.
Ke Bona Lesedi means ‘I see the light’ when translated from Setswana.
A GBV victim can submit a request to the NPA for assis-tance.
The senior public pros-ecutor or court preparation manager will then identify an appropriate court preparation officer to assist.
“The service does not prom-ise a particular outcome in the case and each individ-ual’s experience is unique.
Nonetheless, it assists with empowerment and restoring the victim’s dignity,” says a statement from the NPA.
There are 161 court prepara-tion officers at various courts across the country.
The service is one of vari-ous initiatives introduced by government to deal with the scourge of GBV.
According to the NPA, the complainant, victim, survivor or witness will be contacted by a court preparation officer from the court where she or he will testify.
The court preparation officer will be available to support the complainant at court and throughout the trial.
Special-ised tools and techniques are used to visually show the victim that she or he is heard, protected and respected.
Complainants can speak in their own language and the court preparation officer will ensure that the victim is referred for counselling or therapy, to complete their healing journey.
Many women and children who have suffered GBV, for example, rape, are anxious about going to court to testify and relate intimate details of events in front of strangers.
This service will help them feel more at ease.
GENERALYou can contact the court preparation manag-er/coordinator in your province by calling or emailing the contacts below:
• Eastern Cape (Grahamstown) – Pumla Nomfemele 041 502 5443 – Pnomfemele@justice.gov.za • Eastern Cape (Mthatha) – Sindisiwe Buthelezi – 047 501 2646 – Sbuthelezi@npa.gov.za • Free State – Ena Liebenberg 051 410 6029 Eliebenberg@npa.gov.za • Gauteng (Johannesburg) Asewa Fundi – 011 220 4085 – Afundi@npa.gov.za • Gauteng (Pretoria) – Esther Kabini – 012 351 6713 – Ekabini@npa.gov.za • Kwa-Zulu Natal – Roelien Wiesner – 033 3928712 – Rwiesner@npa.gov.za • Limpopo – Reneilwe Mashamaite – 015 483 0302 – Rmashamaite@justice.gov.za • Northern Cape – Henley Nathan Sass – 054 337 5375 – HSass@justice.gov.za • North West – Mmanotshe Seletisha – 012 700 9000 – Mseletisha@justice.gov.za • Western Cape – Gary Titus – 021 487 7287/021 421 7287 Gvtitus@npa.gov.za • NSP Head Office Karen Tewson – 012 845 6399/012 812 6399 – Ktewson@npa.gov.zaOther important contact numbers to keep:
• SAPS Emergency Service: 10111• GBV Command Centre: 0800 428 428 or dial *120*7867# from any cellphone.• Persons with disabilities: SMS ‘help’ to 31531• Women Abuse Helpline: 0800 150 150• Childline South Africa: 0800 055 555 • SAPS Crime Stop: 0860 10111 or SMS 32211• GBVF-related service complaints (SAPS): 0800 333 177/complaintsnodalpoint@saps.gov.za• Domestic Violence Helpline: 0800 150 150 • AIDS Helpline: 0800 012 322
Protect our women and children
vukuzenzele unnamed
A year ago, almost to the day, thousands of wom en, men and children marched to Parliament to protest against a spate of rapes and killings of women and girls.
At the time, the nation was reeling from the murders of Uyinene Mrwetyana, Leighandre Jegels, Jesse Hess and a number of other wom-en who had lost their lives at the hands of brutal men.From all social backgrounds, young and old, students and working women, the peaceful protesters held aloft placards that read ‘Enough is Enough’ and ‘Am I next?’.
The anguish and the anger was palpable that day.
As I received their clearly articulated demands, it was clear to me that we needed to act urgently and with determination.
It was important to me that I did not respond with hollow words and empty promises.A few days later, I called a joint sitting of Parliament, where we announced a R1.6 billion Emergency Response Action Plan to combat gender-based violence and femicide (GBVF).Over the six months of its implementation, public spending in various gov-ernment departments was reprioritised to support interventions for care and support for survivors, for awareness and prevention campaigns, to improve laws and policies, to promote the economic empowerment of women, and to strengthen the criminal justice system.And now we are on the cusp of the most far-reaching leg-islative overhaul in the fight against GBVF.Three key Bills relating to GBVF have been introduced in Parliament recently.
Through the introduction of these Bills, we are honouring the promise we made to the protestors last year and to all the women of this country.The three amendment Bills are designed to fill the gaps that allow some perpetrators of these crimes to evade justice and to give full effect to the rights of our country’s women and children.These Bills, once finalised, will help to restore the confi-dence of our country’s wom-en that the law is indeed there to protect them.
The first is the Bill to amend the Criminal Law (Sexual Of-fences and Related Matters) Amendment Act.
This creates a new offence of sexual intim-idation, extends the ambit of the offence of incest, and extends the reporting duty of persons who suspect a sexual offence has been committed against a child.It expands the scope of the National Register for Sex Offenders (NRSO) to include the particulars of all sex offenders.
Until now, it has only applied to sex offend-ers convicted of sex crimes perpetrated against children or persons with mental disa-bilities.
The time an offend-er’s particulars must remain on the register has been increased, and those listed on the register will have to disclose this when they sub-mit applications to work with vulnerable persons.
The Bill also provides for the names of persons on the NRSO to be publicly available.The Criminal and Related Matters Amendment Bill tightens, among others, the granting of bail to perpetra-tors of GBVF, and expands the offences for which minimum sentences must be imposed.The amendments impose new obligations on law-en-forcement officials and on our courts.When a prosecutor does not oppose bail in cases of GBV, they have to place their reasons on record.
Unless a person accused of GBV can provide exceptional circum-stances why they should be released on bail, the court must order their detention until the criminal proceed-ings are concluded.In reaching a decision on a bail application, the courts are compelled to take a num-ber of considerations into ac-count.
They include pre-trial reports on the desirability of releasing an accused on bail, threats of violence made against a survivor, and the view of the survivor regard-ing his or her safety.When it comes to parole, a complainant or a relative of a deceased victim must be able to make representation to the parole board.
Given the unacceptably high levels of intimate partner violence in our country, we have tightened the provisions of the Domestic Violence Act.
Domestic violence is now defined to cover those in engagements, dating, in cus-tomary relationships, and actual or perceived romantic, intimate or sexual relation-ships of any duration.The Bill also extends the definition of ‘domestic vio-lence’ to include the protec-tion of older persons against abuse by family members.Complainants will be able to apply for a protection order online.
To prevent a scenario where perpetrators can hide past histories of domestic violence, an integrated repos-itory of protection orders will be established.The proposed amendments also oblige the departments of Social Development, Basic Education, Higher Education and Health to provide certain services to survivors where needed and to refer them for sheltering and medical care.The circumstances under which a prosecutor can refuse to institute a prose-cution when offences have been committed under the amended Act or to withdraw charges when it involves the infliction of bodily harm or where a weapon was used to threaten a complainant have been limited.
In perhaps the most ground-breaking proposed amend-ment to the Act, if someone has knowledge, reasonable belief or suspicion that an act of domestic violence has been committed against a child, a person with disability or an older person and fails to report it to a social worker or police officer they can be fined and even imprisoned.
Similarly, failure by a mem-ber of the SAPS to comply with their obligations under the Act will be regarded as misconduct and must be reported to the Civilian Sec-retariat for Police Service.The law is the one sure protector of all of society, but especially its most vulner-able.
When diligently and fairly applied, it is the most powerful guarantor of justice.The women of South Af-rica have had enough of lukewarm actions that do not address one of the most fundamental rights of all – to live in freedom from fear.This government and its partners will make good by the women of South Africa.
We will not let them down.
Woza Matrics launched
Dale Hes
This year’s Ma triculants have to faced considerable challenges because of the Coronavirus Disease (COVID-19).
The Department of Basic Education (DBE) has en-sured that the safe re-open-ing of schools is one of its top priorities, along with supporting learners with various programmes to help them successfully complete the academic year.
One of these is the Woza Matrics programme, which was launched on 1 Septem-ber in collaboration with a number of broadcasting partners and educational experts.
As part of the programme, catch-up lessons on six key matric subjects are being aired on SABC, DStv and Openview (Channel 122) every day for 12 weeks, from 8am to 10am and 1pm to 3pm.
The goal is to help learners to prepare for their final exams.
The platform also provides live lessons, during which learners can ask teachers questions.
Exam tips are also provided.
Woza Matrics recognises that while all learners have lost school time, Grade 12s have been the most severely affected, as their marks are extremely important for their career and university acceptance.
Basic Education Minister Angie Motshekga says the programme is vital, considering the disruption to learn ing caused by COVID-19.
“Matric is always stressful, but 2020 has been filled with unusual stresses.
I want to congratulate all our Grade 12 learners and their families for their perseverance and determination.
It is abundantly clear that additional support is required for learners and we will continue to provide this.
There are a few months left before the end of the year and Woza Matrics will give learners the support they need to prepare for the final exams,” she says.The programme is unique in that it targets the majority of Grade 12s in the country who do not have regular access to the Internet and connected digital devices.
Broadcasts will be available to view by most of the 1.2 million learners who are writing Matric exams in November.
The Council of Education Ministers has urged all learners and parents to make use of the platform.
SABC CEO Madoda Mxakwe says the broadcaster is proud to be part of the initiative.
“We are pleased to be one of the key role-players in saving the 2020 Matric year.
As a public service broadcaster, we are duty-b ound to ensure that our content in-cludes a significant number of educational programmes, particularly during a period when it is most needed.”Your questions answeredWhat subjects will be covered?• Maths• Geography• Life sciences • Physical sciences • Accounting • Maths literacy.
Why were these time slots chosen, because learners could be at school?• School attendance times vary across districts and provinces, due to social distancing measures.
Many Matrics will be at home at the time of broadcasting.
• A small percentage of learners are also being home-schooled.
• The main broadcasts will be repeated after 4pm on Openview and are available on DStv Catch-Up.
Why only Matrics?• Matrics are under the most pressure to plan their post-school lives.• Matrics have faced more significant disruption to their schooling since March 2020 because their curriculum was not shortened.• Matrics have fallen the furthest behind on curricu lum learning.Where can I find the viewing schedule?The viewing schedule is available in TV guides and on the Woza Matrics website at wozamatrics.co.za.
Repeat broadcasts will be available.
Is support being provided to parents and teach ers?Yes.
The broadcast schedule will have some sessions on tips for parents on ways to support their Matric children.
Some sessions will focus on teachers and the DBE's Teacher Connect WhatsApp platform will communicate key messages to teachers.
Will there be a focus on dealing with the stresses faced by Matrics?Yes.
There will be several sessions focused on providing tips for student well-being, coping with stress and managing anxiety.
For more information, visit the Woza Matrics website at wozamatrics.co.za or email info@wozamatrics.co.zaTHE WOZA MATRICS programme aims to help all Grade 12 learners pass their final examinations.
We can and will do more to end load shedding
vukuzenzele unnamed
Over the past few weeks, severe load shedding has disrupted our economy and caused extreme hardship for all South Africans.
Stage 6 load shedding was triggered by the loss of more than 18 000 megawatts (MW) of generation capacity due to unit breakdowns and an unprotected strike by Eskom workers.After more than a decade of electricity shortages, South Africans are right to feel frustrated and angry.
At times like this, it can feel like there is no end in sight.Yet, while load shedding appears to worsen, the reality is that we have already taken several important actions to address the shortfall in electricity supply.Our immediate priority is to stabilise the electricity system.
As the system recovers and generation capacity is restored, Eskom will be able to reduce load shedding to lower stages.The agreement reached between Eskom and labour unions will enable critical repairs and return additional units to operation.
The transmission line from Cahora Bassa in Mozambique has been restored, adding 600 MW to the grid, and Medupi Unit 6 returned to service recently adding another 720 MW.
Additional units are expected to come back online, further easing the current shortfall.
At the same time, law enforcement agencies are working hard to tackle sabotage, theft and fraud at Eskom to address the threat that these criminal actions pose to the electricity system.
In the end, the bottom line is that we need to add more capacity to the grid.
This will create space for Eskom to undertake critical maintenance and increase the reliability of its fleet.
It will also create a buffer so that even if several units experience breakdowns at once, other sources can be used.One of the first steps I took in 2018 was to revive the renewable energy procurement programme.
In addition to the procurement of new generation capacity through this programme, the increase of the licensing threshold for new generation projects to 100 MW means that private investors do not require a license to build generation facilities up to this size.
This simple reform has unlocked a massive potential pipeline of investment.
Eskom has made land available next to existing power stations for private investment in renewable energy projects.
Design modifications have been completed to improve the performance of Medupi units 1, 2 and 3 and are underway in units 5 and 6.While these actions are significant and will bear fruit over the coming months, they are clearly not enough to address the crisis that we face.What the past few weeks have demonstrated is that we need to do more and do so with the utmost urgency.There is no reason why a country like ours – with the skills, capabilities and resources we have at our disposal – should have to endure a shortage of electricity.Over the past few weeks, we have been working with the relevant Ministers and senior officials on a range of additional measures to accelerate all efforts to increase our electricity supply.
The message is clear: this is no time for business as usual.
We need to act boldly to make load shedding a thing of the past.While the measures we have already taken will secure the supply of reliable and affordable electricity into the future, we have been looking at what additional measures we can take now to bring that goal closer.We will soon be completing the detailed work and consultations needed to finalise these further measures.
We will then, soon, be able to announce a comprehensive set of actions to achieve much faster progress in tackling load shedding.
There are no easy solutions to our electricity crisis.
But we are committed and determined to explore every avenue and use every opportunity to ensure that we generate enough electricity to meet the country’s needs.
Small business urged to apply for support
Nosihle Shelembe
The Minister of Small Business Development, Stella Ndabeni-Abra hams, has encouraged small businesses in townships and rural areas to apply for support through the Township and Rural Entrepreneurship Programme (TREP).
“We are deliberate in addressing unemployment and poverty, but we also have a responsibility to grow the economy,” Minister Ndabeni Abrahams said.Addressing the SheTradesZA Youth Seminar held recently in Pretoria, the minister said the maximum value of TREP stands at R1 million, with one com ponent being a grant and the other a loan.
Township or rural-based entrepreneurs can apply for support, including funding, through the common application template from the Small Enterprise Development Agency (SEDA), the Small Enterprise Finance Agency (SEFA), the National Empowerment Fund (NEF) and the National Youth Development Agency (NYDA).The Owners of the business must be South African nationals.The following schemes are available for qualifying entrepreneurs:
• Small-scale bakeries and confectioneries support programme• Autobody repairs and mechanics support programme (as well as small and independent autospares shops and informal automotive entrepreneurs)• Butcheries support programme• Clothing, leather and textiles support programme• Personal care support programme• Spaza-shop support programme• Tshisanyama and cooked food support programme Registration can be done on smmesa.gov.za/.
and complete the information required.In an effort to ensure the funding processes for small business is seamless and user-friendly, government is working toward merging entities for small businesses to form one agency.“We are currently in the process of merging SEFA and SEDA as well as the Co-operative Banks Development Agency.”SheTrades programme Ndabeni-Abrahams said through various initiatives, government has assisted the small business sector to grow and create much-needed employment.“The Department of Small Business Development and SEDA formed a partnership with the International Trade Centre (ITC), to bring the SheTrades programme to South Africa, and create a SheTradesZA hub.“The programme aims to empower women-owned enterprises to trade locally, regionally and internationally.
The hub supports strengthening the business skills and competitiveness of at least 10 000 South African female entrepreneurs over a four-year period,” the minister said.Nearly 3 000 South African female entrepreneurs are already registered on the SheTradesZA Hub and receive free e-learning and capacity building.The SheTradesZA Hub will also improve access to investment for women-owned enterprises and promote business opportunities.“The department and SEDA’s involvement in the SheTradesZA Hub demonstrates our commitment to developing and ensuring economic empowerment of women in South Africa,” Minister Ndabeni-Abrahams said.
Empowering women through agriculture
Owen Mngadi
Dr Ethel Zulu is a remarkable small farmer on the rise.She uses her in-depth understanding of nutrition and years of experience to produce organic chickens and vegetables on her farm with the aim of empowering other women to become commercial farmers.
Dr Zulu (48), who holds a doctorate in nutrition, owns a 23-hectare farm in Cul-linan outside Pretoria, where she produces and agro-pro-cesses organic veggies and chickens that she supplies to several supermarkets.
Her farm also hosts 20 students who are pursuing agricultural studies for trai-ning.
Dr Zulu left her job at the North West Department of Agriculture to start her training agency, Hope Nutri-tion Business Consultants.
This was after she relocated to Gauteng but could not find a job as a nutritionist.
She is passionate about agri-culture and her vision is to get as many women as pos-sible into farming, a field she believes has the potential to empower and create jobs.“I served for eight years, working with agricultural extension officers, and we helped many farmers with food safety, hygiene and nutrition.
Agriculture has been my passion since I was young and I never imagined myself doing anything else.”Through her training agency, Dr Zulu explained that she worked across six provinces, helping women and young people to run their farming operations.
Commercial poultry farmingIn 2017, Dr Zulu realised that her training was meaningless without results, so she bought a farm to put her knowledge into action.Today, she has become a commercial poultry farmer with more than 7 500 broi-lers.
Her initial plan was to produce only organic vegetables.
“I needed chickens for manure.
I would go to people’s houses to collect it to keep my veggies organic.
South Africa's first female paratrooper Dr Ethel Zulu is leading from the front on her farm where she grows organic vegetables and free-range chickens she supplies to the established supermarkets.
That is how the idea of the broilers came about.
Within two years, we produced 5 000 broilers and started to supply local super-markets.”She added that her chicken are free-range and organic, with zero hor-mones.
She uses chicken manure to grow vegetables such as spinach, broccoli, cabbage and peppers.
In addition to supermarkets, Dr Zulu supplies her produce to hawkers.
Her operation is so succes-sful that she employs 12 women permanently.
According to Dr Zulu, poultry is the most critical sector in the country, as most families consume chicken more than any other kind of meat.Dr Zulu has hopes of training more than 1 000 women in farming across the country each year.
She is also set on being one of South Africa’s trusted producers of free-range chickens and organic vegetables.
She advises aspiring female farmers to start small and not wait for government support.
“When government sup-port finds you, it will be a boost.
If you need to produce 3 000 broilers, nothing stops you from starting with 20.
Approach local supermarkets to get their specifications on the quality they want and work in groups so that you can meet their quality and quantity demands,” she adds.
Empowering women through agricultureDr Zulu believes agri culture can play a role in empowering women economically and creating more jobs for women.
“If you empower a woman, you empower the nation.
We are able to share our knowledge and get more people involved.”She adds that women do not have to limit themselves to primary agriculture but need to explore other aspects of the industry such as agro-processing, packaging and reselling.
“Financial independence is the only thing that can help us end the scourge of gender-based violence and that can be achieved through farming, among other things,” said Dr Zulu.
Baking loaves of success
Galoome Shopane
Over two decades ago, a group of women from Qwaqwa in the Free State put on their aprons, got out the flour and mixed up a better future for them selves.
The Leratong Bakery co-operative was started by nine women.
Sadly, five of the original members have passed away but the remain ing four have not only been able to put bread on the table but have created a strong sisterly bond.
Leratong Bakery supplies nine crèches around Qwaq -wa, as well as private house holds.
“Everything we do was self-taught and we have worked very hard,” said co-operative member Ntse jwa Nkone.
Nkone said that part of their success and sustaina bility came from the support that they received from their community.
“Our relationship with community members is very good; they have supported our products and have encouraged us to continue what we do as they love our baked goods.”Nkone explained that they received funding from the Department of Social Devel opment that enabled them to purchase three stoves, a dough mixer, bread slicer, ingredients and allowed them to do some marketing.“The process was not that difficult and we did not wait a long time.
We just went for an interview and we made it,” explained Nkone.
The women received further assistance from the National Development Agency (NDA) which trained them in management and operations.
The NDA also donated a minivan for deliveries.
This all amounted to funding worth about R900 000.
The NDA is an agency of the Department of Social Development.
October is Social Development Month which is aimed at engaging communities to identify their challenges and put together action plans to deal with these challenges.
With the assistance of the NDA the Leratong Bakery has definitely implemented their plan of action by moving their business to new heights and creating jobs.
The bakery has made a name for itsself and are famous for the freshest bakes in town.
Nkone said she is proud of the business’s longevity and now wants to incorporate more people into their bakery.
“I hope that the co-operative will grow even bigger so that we can take on and serve more people,” she said.
Nkone and her partners hope to infiltrate the market further by supplying local supermarkets with their bread and buns.
Dealing with the loss of a loved one
Vukuzenzele unnamed
Many people have lost loved ones as a result of the Coronavirus pandemic and the death may often feel unreal.
“You are not alone,” says community psychologist Zanele Ludziya from the Stikland Hospital in the Western Cape.Losing a loved one is never easy and can trigger a range of emotions.“There are many signs you can look out for when a loved one is grieving, but an absence of symptoms does not mean that the person is not grieving.“People may show signs of anger, irritability, sadness or apathy.
Their cog nitive functioning may also be affected, as they may be preoccupied with thoughts and memories of the deceased.
They could also have trouble concentrating or may appear confused,” says Ludziya.She advises people to be aware of behavioural changes, such as being tearful or increased alcohol and substance use.
“They may smoke more than they usually do, they may withdraw or isolate or they may avoid people and places.
They may want silence or increased noise.
They could also be more aggressive or snappy,” she says.When supporting a loved one, Ludziya says it is helpful to understand the grieving process and that everyone experiences it differently.
She explains that grief is not a state, but a process, and people usually go through stages of grief.
Common stages of griefThe common stages of grief are denial or isolation (experiencing numbness or shock); anger (getting angry with others when they have not done anything wrong); bargaining (experiencing feelings of guilt over things not done or said); depression (the sadness that comes with realising that life will continue without their loved); and acceptance (finding a way to living a fulfilled life without the person).“One way of coping or showing support is to understand the stage of grief you are in or that a loved one is experiencing.
This can reassure the grieving person that what they are experiencing is normal.
Treat the person or yourself with kindness, patience and understanding, keeping in mind that what you are experiencing will eventually pass,” says Ludziya.Get free help for a gambling disorderKgaogelo LetsebeThere is no denying there is a certain glamour to gambling.
Yet, for someone suffering from a gambling addiction, life is far from glamorous.
This is according to Lesego Kwanini (34), a marketing consultant from Alexandra, who started gambling in 2010 to escape the stress of her relationship and financial situation.“It started innocently, taking a chance on the slot machines.
It wasn’t long before I was hooked.
In one day, I won R50 000.
It’s hard to say no to that kind of rush.
But in the end, my habit cost far more than I ever won,” says Kwanini.Between 2010 and 2015, Kwanini lost her job, family and friends.
“I was lying to the people closest to me, but I didn’t care… I had my slot machines – they were my friends.”It was only a matter of time before those ‘friends’ turned into enemies.
Running out of money to support her gam-bling habit, Kwanini found herself in debt and turned to loan sharks, who she could not pay back.
“I was on the verge of suicide,” she admits.While at a casino, Kwanini saw a pamphlet about the South African Responsible Gambling Foundation’s (SARGF) treatment program-me for problem gamblers.
She attended the foundation’s free outpatient counselling sessions for three months.
“It was hard.
There were many times I felt like gambling, but I stayed strong,” she says.
“I feel blessed now.
I’m in a happy place.”According to Sibongile Simelane-Quntana, the Executive Director of the SARGF, a problem gambler is someone who continues to gamble despite the negative consequences or impact it has on their life.
They also do not want to stop.There are many signs a disordered gambler may exhibit, including being wit-hdrawn, tired and asking for money or loans, she says.“There are no winners in gambling, only some who lose less,” says psychiatrist Dr Mike West, who practises at Akeso Milnerton.Betting on games of chance or horses is harmless fun for most people but, when people lose control over their gambling habit, it can be as addictive and destructive as using drugs, says Dr West.
He advises regular gam-blers to ask themselves the following questions: • Do you hide the extent of your gambling?• Do you gamble to escape from problems?
• Are you making larger bets?• When you are not gam-bling, do you feel irritable or depressed?• Do you crave gambling or spend a lot of time think-ing about gambling?• Have you had difficulties in the workplace because of gambling?• Is your gambling negative-ly affecting your relation-ships?If you answer yes to these questions, Dr West advises an in-depth assessment for a gambling disorder.
Steps to revive the economy
Vukuzenzele Unnamed
It will soon be a year since the first reported case of Coronavirus Disease (COVID-19) in our country.
The pandemic has come at a great cost to both public health and the livelihoods of millions of our people.
Many workers lost part of their income as their work hours were reduced with many being retrenched.
Several businesses have incurred heavy losses from scaled-back operations.
Others have had to close.
People working in the informal sector have also suffered.
Most difficult of all, the pandemic has claimed the lives of breadwinners in many families, leaving them destitute and fearful for the future.This is why the extensive relief measures we put in place were both necessary and urgent.
And, now that nearly a year has passed, we can say that these measures have proved effective.Of the full package of relief measures that we introduced, perhaps the two measures that had the greatest impact were the Special COVID-19 Social Relief of Distress Grant and the Unemployment Insurance Fund's (UIF) COVID-19 Temporary Employer/Employee Relief Scheme, generally known as COVID TERS.We would not have been able to roll out these measures in such a short space of time if we had not had an extensive social security infrastructure already in place.
We were able to respond to this huge and immediate need in our society thanks to the substantial nationwide infrastructure and systems of the South African Social Security Agency and the UIF.There were certainly technical and other glitches along the way, but most of these were speedily resolved.
These government agencies did outstanding work to enroll millions of new beneficiaries and ensure they were paid.
The support provided by the UIF was a lifeline to struggling businesses and employees.
It made the difference between companies remaining open and being forced to close, between jobs saved and jobs lost.This benefited businesses like Sihle’s Brew, a restaurant in Gauteng, which was able to retain its 18 employees because of the TERS scheme.
Thanks to government support, Mamoshal agae Trading and Projects, an auto-electrical business in Mokopane, was able to pay its workers as well as its rent and rates during the lockdown.Employees in dire straits were able to receive a portion of their salaries.Lindiwe Ntuli, a parale-gal in Centurion, has told how receiving her benefits enabled her to work from home and be able to afford her rent.There are many stories of companies that have been able to stay afloat over the past year because of the support they received from the UIF.
The same can be said of the small businesses helped by the various grants and loans provided by a number of departments.
These measures greatly helped our people in their time of need.As we transition from relief to recovery, we have to shift gear.While these relief measures were designed to be temporary, the economy will continue to feel the effects of the pandemic for some time.Even as lockdown restrictions have been eased, many companies are struggling to cope with the fallout of months of diminished operations and lost revenue.It is for this reason that, following extensive discussion with social partners at the National Economic Development and Labour Council the COVID TERS benefit has been extended until 15 March 2021 for sectors that have not been able to fully operate.The special COVID grant has been extended for another three months.
These remain short-term measures.Our focus now must be on creating an enabling environment for businesses to recover, and for economic growth that spurs job creation and attracts invest ment.The recovery will be difficult and will take time, not least because we are still in the midst of the pandemic.Important as these relief measures are now, we will not be able to sustain them indefinitely.
We need to make sure that these relief measures provide a firm foundation for a broader recovery without driving the country deeper into debt.
Unless we can bring our national debt down to sustainable levels no meaningful economic recovery will be possible.Our national consciousness must now move beyond the realm of relief into that of recovery, and we must all be part of this effort.As government, hard decisions on public spending will need to be made and implemented this year.Companies will need to be innovative in driving methods and processes that secure their sustainability and profitability, with job retention being their foremost consideration.We must put our money back into our economy by buying local products, supporting local businesses and industrie and procuring from local suppliers.An injured patient with strong prospects for recovery is given regular phys ical therapy to help them get stronger until they can stand unaided.So must these temporary relief measures be seen as the means to get our economy back on its feet.
Our ultimate goal is to walk again.As a nation, let us all lend a hand.
Let us be part of our own development and progress.Let us use the extended relief to drive a stronger recovery.
Make sure you have a will!
vukuzenzele unnamed
If you don’t have a valid will, you will have no control over who inherits your assets when you die.
This might lead to people inheriting your money or assets, even if you didn’t want them to.
If a person dies without making a will, the assets that they owned will be distributed in terms of the Intestate Succession Act, to the people who must rightfully inherit them.The Act sets out rules of how the estate must be distributed.
It goes to close relatives first, in a specific order:
• If you are survived by only a spouse, the spouse will inherit the entire estate.• If you don’t have a spouse and are only survived by your children, they will inherit the estate in equal shares.
• If you are survived by a spouse and children, the spouse will receive a child’s share or R250 000, whichever is greater, and the children share the balance.
For example, if the estate is worth R2 million and the deceased is survived by a spouse and three children, a child’s share amounts is R500 000.
The child’s share is calculated by dividing the value by four.
• If you have no spouse or children, but both your parents are alive, they will inherit the estate in equal shares.
If one parent is dead, but left siblings, the surviving parent will inherit half of the estate and the deceased parent’s descendants will receive the other half.• If both of the deceased’s parents have died, but they left descendants, the estate is split into equal parts.
• If the deceased does not leave a spouse, descendants, parents or parents’ descendants, the nearest blood relation will inherit the entire estate.• Finally, if the deceased is not survived by any relative, the State will inherit the proceeds of the estate.
In addition to the above, a child born out of wedlock can inherit from both blood relations; and an adopted child is deemed as a descendant of his adoptive parent or parents.
When is a will valid?A will is only valid when made by a person 16 years or older, and must meet the following requirements:
• It must be in writing, and your signature must ap-pear on every page and at the end.
• It must be signed in the presence of two or more competent witnesses.
Any person 14 years and above can be a witness.
An heir can’t be a witness.• You must include full de-tails of your assets and who you want to leave them to, including their names and details.
• You must nominate a per-son to manage your estate (the executer).
This person can’t be an heir.• You must state what should happen to a minor beneficiary’s inheritance.• If you are the sole guardian of a minor child, indicate who should be appointed as the child’s guardian.• You must ensure the original signed will is kept safe, because a copy is not valid.
Information supplied by the Office of the Ombud for Financial Services Providers as a member of the National Consumer Financial Education
Ending corruption in the public service
vukuzenzele unnamed
The revelation in Parliament that thousands of public servants have been illegally receiving social grants every month shows we still have a long way to go towards instilling a culture of ethics in the public service.
Earlier this year, it was also found that around 16,000 employees on the government payroll were irregularly paid the COVID-19 Social Relief of Distress grant.
It is common knowledge that applicants with other sources of income do not qualify for this grant.
It is also self-evident that those who receive an income from the state are not eligible to apply.And yet they did.
Some 17,000 people employed at national and provincial government submitted applications in a bid to top up their salaries with money meant for the poor.
Given the extent of need in the country, one that our public servants know too well, this wilful intent to steal from the public purse is unforgivable.Government is now stepping up its efforts to prevent this kind of abuse and act against anyone in the public service involved in wrongdoing.Recently, government launched a new Public Administration Ethics, Integrity and Disciplinary Technical Assistance Unit.
The unit will build capa-city within public bodies to institute disciplinary proceedings in cases of misconduct and cooperate with other organs of state in holding those responsible to account.The unit will refer corruption cases to government’s Anti-Corruption Task Team and follow up with departments to ensure criminal cases involving public servants translate into disciplinary cases.
Working with the multi-agency Fusion Centre, the unit will help identify employees in priority cases investigated by law enforcement authorities.
The unit will monitor the conduct of lifestyle audits of public service employees.
Where departments identify corruption and unexplained wealth, the cases will be referred to the South African Police Service.
The new unit has already begun its work in earnest, helping to identify public servants involved in cases related to COVID-19 procurement, the special COVID-19 grant and Unemployment Insurance Fund fraud.The cases of government officials referred by the Special Investigating Unit for disciplinary action will be monitored by the unit to assess their progress.Another important aspect of the Unit’s work will be institutionalising ethics and integrity in the ranks of the public service.
A few public servants have over the years taken the view that doing business with or unduly benefiting from the State is permissible for them, their friends and their families, provided there has been no illegality.
We must do everything we can to change this attitude.As we work to end corruption, there must be equal focus on inculcating ethical behaviour, because what may not necessarily be illegal can be unethical and unbecoming of a public servant.The new unit will set norms and standards on ethics, integrity and conduct.
It will also build the capacity of departments to discipline officials found guilty of misconduct.
Last year more than 200 employees were trained as presiding officers and initiators.Building an ethical, capable state continues to be a focus of this administration.
As a number of scandals involving public servants illegally benefiting from the state have shown, the process will be difficult and will take some time.
We are nonetheless committed to stay the course.
A capable state is the foundation for the attainment of all our national priorities.
Without improving accountability and promoting ethical conduct, none can be achieved.The vast majority of our public servants are committed, law-abiding and ethical.The task before us is to work together to root out those who are not, and correct the misconception that all those employed in government are either self-serving or corrupt.AI call on all the men and women who serve our country every day to recommit themselves to the values of selflessness and service, and to recall that their conduct must at all times be both legal and ethical.The establishment of this unit is another one of the ways that we are working on to end corruption in government and indeed in all spheres of South African life.
Quality affordable smart phone for Africa
vukuzenzele unnamed
In the world of smartphones, China has Huawei, Korea has Samsung, while the United States of America has Apple.
Long-time dark horse Africa is now taking centre stage with the announcement of the Mara phone project that is touted to take the smartphone business by storm.
Developed by Rwandan businessman and billionaire Ashish Thakkar, the Mara group at the Africa Investment Forum announced ambitious plans to develop manufacturing plants in Rwanda and in South Africa.
During South Africa’s recently held inaugural investment conference, a brainchild of President Cyril Ramaphosa, Thakkar announced that his company would be investing R1.5 billion in a South African venture over the next five years.
Thakkar also said there were further plans to develop the phone in plants across the continent’s five regions.
“We all know the importance of high quality and affordable smartphones and the impact this can have on the continent.
Quality smartphones mean we can truly enable financial inclusion, micro-lending and micro-insurance.
This can translate into better education, digital healthcare and agriculture efficiency and improved commerce.
“If this is all going to be possible… we [need] quality and affordable smartphones.
Unfortunately, we have quality smartphones but they are not affordable and if it is affordable, it is not quality,” he said.
None of the millions of smartphones found worldwide are from Africa, Thakkar said.
“We have a few that are assembled in Africa but nothing is truly being manufactured in Africa.
Thanks to the African Development Bank, this will change,” said the businessman.
He said the idea to produce the Mara phone was made possible thanks to the support from the African Development Bank and its strategy of industrialising Africa.
“We all believe that it is time to shift the narrative, which is why we are also excited that the phone will also be sold in Europe,” he said.
“This will truly be transformative.
It will create thousands of jobs directly and eventually hundreds of thousands of jobs indirectly in the eco-system across the continent,” Thakkar said.
When the sheriff knocks at your door
Allison Cooper
Answering the door to find the sheriff on the other side is enough to have you shaking in your shoes.
A sheriff has the authority to carry out court orders.
This may include attaching (taking) some of your possessions so that they can be sold to help pay back money you owe to someone.
It is important to know your rights and to understand the sheriff’s responsibilities.
The South Africa Board for Sheriffs chairperson, Charmaine Mabuza, stressed that a sheriff is an impartial and independent official of the court appointed by the Minister of the department of Justice and Correctional Services.
Interestingly, sheriffs operate independently from each other; in fact, they are private business people.
The board monitors sheriffs and their deputies to ensure they execute their duties in a humane manner in terms of the Code of Conduct for Sheriffs.
The sheriff or deputy sheriff must serve or execute all documents issued by the courts.
These include summonses, notices, warrants and court orders.
“The sheriffs’ profession is a vitally important arm of
the administration of justice in South Africa.
Without it, justice would grind to a halt,” explained Mabuza.
A sheriff may enter your premises, even when you are not there, providing they have a legal court order to attach some of your possessions.
However, a sheriff must treat you with dignity and respect at all times; and he/she must explain the contents of the court document and what you need to do next.
It is important to know your rights, most notably that a sheriff may not remove necessary items such as food and beds, bedding and clothes.
There are also limitations on other things, such as tools of trade you may need to carry out your work, which may not be attached.
Also, be sure to ask for identification so you are not scammed.
All sheriffs and deputies must carry a valid identification card issued by the South African Board of Sheriffs (SABFS) and must be able to produce it on request.
Living positively with HIV
More Matshediso
Since he was just one month old, 10-yearold Themba Buthele zi* has been on HIV treatment.
His mother Slindelo Buthelezi*, who lives in Johannesburg, passed the virus to her infant through her breastmilk.
She shared with Vuk’uzenzele the details of how she strives to keep both herself and her son healthy by ensuring they routinely take their antiretroviral treatment (ART) to supress their viral loads.
“He was about one month old when he tested positive.
I could not understand why because his siblings did not get the infection.
The nurses at the clinic then explained to me that unfortunately my son got it from breast feeding.
I was devastated but I had to accept it as time went by,” she said.
She has made her son’s health a priority.
Because she has been living with the disease for over 25 years, Slindelo knows that to keep her child alive and strong, she must ensure that he never misses a dose of his medicine.
When Themba was about seven, Slindelo explained to him why he had to take medication every night.
“I told him the truth.
I also told him not to be scared and let him know that I also live with HIV .
Because I am a mother who talks openly to her children, it was easy for him to accept it and we talk about it whenever it is necessary because I want him to be free,” she explained.
“We go to the clinic to gether and he is aware of his health status.
He un derstands very well why he has to take medication.
Sometimes he even re minds me just before the alarm rings to remind us to take it,” she said.
Slindelo said her son’s class teacher knows about his status and understands that he will sometimes be absent from school to allow him to go for check-ups and to col lect medication.
“I think it is in my child’s best interests that the teacher knows,” she explained.
She advised parents and guardians who have children who live with the disease to take their chil dren to clinics or doctors whenever they are not well.
Her biggest challenge is that she is unem -ployed and survives on social grants and the profit made from selling ice-cream.
With regular meals essential to their wellbeing, much of their money goes on buying nutritious food.
“So far I can say my child is okay.
He has never been troubled or felt that he was different from other children just because he lives with the dise ase.
He is very bright and does well at school,” she said.
*Not their real names.from page 12
December 2018 EditionWhilst South Af rica has the largest HIV ep idemic in the world, with about 19 percent of the global number of people living with HIV , 15 per cent of new infections and 11 percent of Aids-related deaths, it also has the larg est treatment programme in the world, accounting for 20 percent of people on antiretroviral therapy globally.
The country also has one of the largest domestically funded programmes, with about 80 percent of the Aids response funded by the gov ernment.
Below is a timeline of significant developments in South Africa’s fight against HIV/Aids over the years.
1983: First case of Aids di agnosed in South Africa and the first aids-related death.
1985: First advisory group for Aids was established by government.
1990: First national antena tal survey revealed that 0.8 percent of pregnant women were infected with HIV .
1993: HIV prevalence in pregnant women rose to 4.3 percent.
The number of HIV infections recorded rose by 60 percent within two years.
The numbers were predicted to double.
1996: Three percent of the population was infected.
1997: The health depart ment endorsed the contro versial drug Virodene.
2000: The Department of Health rolled out the first five-year National Strategic Plan (NSP) to fight sexually transmitted diseases (STIs), Tuberculosis (TB) and HIV/Aids.
To supervise the pro cess, the South African Na tional Aids Council (SANAC) was established.
2001: Government fought with pharmaceutical compa nies to allow for less expen -sive and locally-produced anti-retroviral drugs.
2002: Transmission preven tion drugs became available to pregnant women by order of the High Court.
2003: Plans to make an ti-retroviral treatment avail able readily and publicly was approved.
2004: Government intro duced free anti-retroviral (ARV) therapy.
Since then, the number of South Africans receiving ARV treatment has risen rapidly and new in fections among adolescents have steadily decreased.
2007: SANAC finalised the second five-year NSP .
2008: Thabo Mbeki re signed as South African President and his successor, Kgalema Motlanthe, appoint ed Barbara Hogan as Minister of Health.
She immediately committed government to a concerted and decisive re sponse to the epidemic.
2012: SANAC’s third NSP (2012 to 2016) massively scaled up South Africa’s anti-retroviral treatment programme and reduced the number of mother-to-child transmission rate to 1.5 per cent.
From 2012 to 2017, HIV incidence decreased by 44 percent.
2013: Minister of Health, Dr Aaron Motsoaledi, introduc es the fixed-dose combination (FDC) antiretroviral drugs (ARVs) also known as the single dose.
The single pill is taken once a day instead of three to five pills a day.
2016: There were 7.1 mil lion people living with HIV , of which 56 percent were on antiretroviral therapy.
2016 to 2017: New infec tions amongst adolescent girls and young women decreased from 2 000 per week in 2016 to 1 300 per week in 2017, and 67 percent of men between 15 and 24 were reported to be medically circumcised.
2017–2022: The fourth NSP aims to accelerate pro gress towards meeting fasttrack targets by reducing new HIV infections; improving treatment, care and support; reaching key and vulnerable populations; and addressing the social and structural driv ers of HIV , TB and STIs.
First time voter eager to register for 2019 elections
More Matshediso
Ponalo Notwane will ensure that he registers to vote for the 2019 General Elections.
Notwane (21) says he will be voting for the first time during next year’s elections.
He told Vuk’uzenzele that he will either register at a voting station in his home town in Klerksdorp in the North West or at the University of Pretoria, where he is currently studying towards a degree in Computer Science.
“This is exciting for me because I will finally have a say about which political party should lead our country and I am hoping that many young people who qualify to vote will also use this opportunity to register because this will affect their future,” said Notwane.
The IEC has announced that the final voter registration weekend is set for 26-27 January 2019.
About 22 932 voting stations across the country will open their doors from 08:00 to 17:00 to allow first time voters to register and others to update and check their registration details.
However, the electoral commission was concerned that the lowest voter registration levels are for voters aged between 18 and 19-years-old, which makes up 15.1 percent of the estimated population.
This is followed by the 20 to 29 year-old-age group, which makes up 56.7 percent of the estimated voting population.
Notwane says he believes that the low turn out of young people voting, is a result of lack of information about elections, which makes it challenging for the youth to participate.
Notwane said young people must realise that it does not help to complain about not getting services from government if they do not vote.
“For example, service delivery is a bit inconsistent in my hometown, but if young people can develop an interest in issues of governance and politics, they will be able to change how things are done,” he said.
Rape survivors find their voice
vukuzenzele unnamed
armilla was raped at 18, while Athena fell victim to her rapist
at age 12.
“It is difficult to describe the impact of something as trau- matic as rape.
I have always been a fighter and martial arts was one of my favourite sports.
"Being raped by ‘a friend’, in a situation where I couldn't fight back, was a huge knock to my self-confidence.
It took a long time for me to realise that it was not my fault.
“The initial impact was
fear, shame and guilt.
When I found my voice, I was in- spired to change the way we socialise our children and create awareness around the issues of victim blaming and our attitudes towards female sexuality,” said Karmilla.
Invisible and withdrawn Athena on the other hand fell into a goth phase.
She wore all black and was quiet and withdrawn.
“I made myself invisible so that no one would pay attention to me and sin- gle me out.
I sometimes still
do this, but my biggest step towards healing was dyeing my hair bright purple.
It took two years to speak about my experience,” she said.
The first time Karmilla said ‘I was raped’ was in an argu- ment with her mother, who didn’t like the way she was living her life.
After trying therapy, which didn’t work, Karmilla moved out.
Soon af- ter, she met her husband and the next stage of her recovery began.
“He respected me and was the first man I talked to about the rape.
Later, preg- nancy and childbirth had a profound impact on my atti- tude towards sex.
It became a physical expression of love and was extremely healing.” Finding her voice Karmilla got involved with Slutwalk Johannesburg and did her first Slutwalk in 2011.
SlutWalk is a protest march calling for an end to rape cul- ture, including victim blaming and shaming of sexual assault victims.
“I finally let go of the guilt and shame and felt com- pletely healed.
I vowed to do everything I can to offer this freedom to other survivors.” Both women stress that everyone’s healing journey is different.
“Some days I can get up on a stage and tell everyone, but on other days dropping my pen is enough to make me want to cry.
Rape is an intimate violation that affects us on so many levels,” said Athena.
But there is hope
“As clichéd as it sounds, it does get better.
First, you feel like you’re falling into a bot- tomless pit and you will never see the light.
You have to let it all in, don’t fight it.
Wave after wave will try to drown you, but you will learn to swim.
"You may never get all the way out of the water, but every new coping mechanism and the people we let ourselves trust will take us closer to the shore,” she added.
Karmilla attributes The
TEARS Foundation, a Non-Profit organisation which assists and provides a support network for survivors of rape, as playing a key role in her healing.
Child abuse, recognise the signs
Allison Cooper
If you suspect a child is being abused-you have a legal obligation to report it to the South Afri- can Police Services’ Fami- ly Violence, Child Protec- tion and Sexual Offences Unit.
“Failure to do so is a crim- inal office,” said Teddy Bear Foundation director, Dr Sha- heda Omar.
The foundation provides holistic, integrated and comprehensive services to victims of child abuse and their families.
“Abuse has to be reported, even if it’s just a suspicion, as long as you are acting in good faith.
If the allegation is unfounded, the person reporting the matter will not be subjected to any legal recourse according to a precedent set by law,” Dr Omar explained.
According to the World
Health Organisation, there are various forms of child abuse, including physi- cal, sexual, emotional or
psychological, neglect and exploitation.
If you suspect that a child is being abused, there are signs to look for.
One of the most common signs of physical abuse is injuries that a child struggles to explain, such as
bruises, burns or bite marks.
Children who are physically abused might also flinch or back away when people raise their voices or move towards them too quickly.
Signs of emotional abuse can include apathy; depres- sion; hostility or stress; lack of concentration; eating dis- orders; headaches, nausea and abdominal pains; and suicide attempts.
Sexual abuse is the most difficult form of abuse to deal with.
When a child discloses sexual abuse, it is very important that it be taken seriously and handled with sensitivity.
Expressions of horror, disbelief or blame can be just as damaging to a child as the act itself.
“The rule of thumb is never to look at child abuse in iso- lation, but rather in context.
Look for a cluster of symp- toms,” said Dr Omar.
She explained that the overarching signs are sud- den changes in behaviour.
A quiet child, for example, may suddenly become unruly and disruptive and display signs of aggression.
“If a child tells you that they are being abused, empathise with the child’s pain and trauma and re- main supportive.
Do not overreact and badger a child with many questions.
Rather move at their pace, explain the processes that will be followed and the people that may become involved,” Dr Omar said.
An honour to lead the African Union
Vukuzenzele Unnamed
South Africa’s term as Chair of the African Union has come to an end.
As we reflect on our year in this position, I am reminded of the old saying that ‘in crisis lies opportunity’.
Ours was a baptism of fire, having assumed the Chair-ship in the same month the first case of coronavirus was reported on the continent.The priorities we outlined for our term, among them furthering peace and security, the economic empowerment of women and deepening economic integration, had to be immediately and dramat-ically reoriented to deal with the pandemic.Our most pressing task was to steer the focus of the African Union to addressing the worst global emergency in over a century.COVID-19 has affected all the countries on the conti-nent.
To date there are more than 3.5 million confirmed cases in Africa, and more than 88,000 people have died.It has been a health, human-itarian, social and economic crisis for African countries, most of whom are inade-quately resourced to manage a health emergency of this size.And yet, as unprecedented as the nature of the pandemic has been, so too has been the manner in which African countries have come together to fight it.In doing so we have drawn principally on the continent’s own expertise, capabilities and institutions such as the Africa Centres for Disease Control and Prevention (Af-rica CDC).Africa did not sit by passive-ly as the true extent and dan-ger of the pandemic unfurled.
From the earliest days of the pandemic and led by the AU, we swiftly developed a continental response strategy, driven by the Africa CDC and regional task forces.
We realised that every coun-try on the continent would be severely affected by the pan-demic.
Most would not have the resources needed to meet the public health challenge or to protect their economies.
We therefore agreed as African countries to appoint several prominent Africans as special envoys, who would engage with international funders and multilateral institutions to make the case for financial support and debt relief on Africa’s behalf.In this way, working as a one continent, we were able to achieve debt relief for many countries and financial assistance towards our COVID response and economic recovery.But much as African countries went to the international community for support, we first helped ourselves – establishing and capitalising a continental COVID-19 Response Fund.For every partnership forged with better-resourced nations and the international donor community, we set up our own innovative and ground-breaking African Medical Supplies Platform to enable all African countries to quickly secure personal protective equipment and other medical supplies in an equitable, affordable manner.And now that the COVID-19 vaccine is available, we have worked as a collective to ensure that the continent gets its fair share, working with the COVAX Facility and led by our own African Vaccine Acquisition Task Team.
Vaccine rollout has already commenced on the continent and we aspire to have the majority of the continent’s population vaccinated by the end of 2021 to achieve herd immunity.We have acted as one to protect health, people and livelihoods on the continent.
In doing so, we have demonstrated our capacity for self-reliance and our ability to be the drivers of our own development.Despite the dominance of COVID-19, we have still managed to make advances in several of our key priorities.During our term, the Africa Continental Free Trade Area (AfCFTA) was finally launched, heralding a new era of intra-African trade and economic integration.Even under the difficult conditions posed by the pandemic, the continent has pushed ahead with towards the goal of ‘silencing the guns’ on the continent.
The AU has been actively involved in ne-gotiations around the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam, in achieving a ceasefire in Libya and promoting peace in South Sudan.Another focus of our term has been on the economic empowerment of women, which we will continue to champion even beyond our term and throughout the Decade of African Women’s Financial and Economic Inclusion to 2030.As we hand over the baton to the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) we leave this preeminent continental body in a position of greater strength.South Africa will continue to play its part to foster integration on the continent, and support the incoming Chair and the organisation in its efforts to meet the aspirations of the AU’s Agenda 2063.When the Organisation for African Unity was founded in 1963, Member States planted the seeds of cooperation and solidarity in pursuit of a better life for all the peoples of Africa.They affirmed that African unity was paramount if the welfare and wellbeing of Africa’s people was to be assured.History bears witness that these seeds have not always fallen on fertile ground, and over the years the continental unity project has experienced many hurdles and false starts.But the grave threat posed by this pandemic has galvanised African countries to collective action.In the hot-house of the COVID-19 crisis, the seeds of unity and cooperation planted by our pioneering forebears have come to life and flourished.This time of great trial and difficulty has been among the AU’s finest hours.We are honoured to have been given the opportunity to lead the organisation through this period, when it practically demonstrated the true meaning of the words African Union.
This is an accomplishment for which all the citizens of our continent Africa should feel proud and from which they should draw encour-agement.
COVID-19 vaccine: What you need to know
Allison Cooper
With South Afri ca’s mass Coro navirus Disease (COVID-19) vaccination programme rolling out for healthcare workers in February, Vuk’uzenzele sheds some light on what the COVID-19 vaccine is, how it works and why it’s so important to stop the spread of the virus.
What does a vaccine do?A vaccine trains your body’s immune system (which fights infection), to produce antibodies (proteins that fight disease) – exactly like it would if you were exposed to a virus.
Why is the vaccine so important?Being vaccinated against COVID-19 is an effective way to protect yourself against the virus because your risk of infection is reduced.
You are then less likely to pass the virus on to someone else.The aim of vaccination is to reach herd immunity – when enough of the population is immune to the virus it provides indirect protection to those who aren’t immune, bringing the spread of the virus under control.
Are vaccines necessary to prevent the spread of COVID-19?There is overwhelming scientific evidence that vaccination is the best defence against serious infections.Will the vaccine stop me from getting COVID-19?No vaccine provides 100% protection.
Herd immunity also does not provide full protection to those who are not vaccinated.
However, with herd immunity, these people will have substantial protection.
Is the vaccination safe?COVID-19 vaccines go through a demanding, multi-stage testing process, including large trials that involve tens of thousands of people.Every vaccine used in South Africa’s mass vaccination programme has to be approved by the South African Health Products Regulatory Authority.
The Oxford University-AstraZeneca vaccine has already been approved by various regulators around the world and is being rolled out in other countries.
Who will get the vaccine first?The country’s estimated 1.25 million healthcare workers will receive the vaccine first.
In Phase Two, essential workers such as teachers, police, municipal workers, taxi drivers and other frontline personnel; people in institutions such as old age homes, shelters and prisons; and people over 60 and adults with co-morbidities will be prioritised.In Phase Three, about 22.5 million of the remaining adult population will be vaccinated.
The target is to vaccinate 67% of the population by the end of 2021.
By then we should reach herd immunity.
Who is purchasing the vaccine?Government is the sole pur chaser of vaccines and will distribute them to provincial governments and the private sector.All those who are vaccinated will be placed on a national register and provided with a vaccination card.
Building a foundation for investment
vukuzenzele unnamed
Normally, this is the time of year when we bring together investors from across the country and around the world for the annual South Africa Investment Conference.
We held the first Invest-ment Conference in 2018 as part of our ambitious drive to raise R1.2 trillion in new investment over five years.
The conference was atten-ded by over a thousand delegates in 2018 and 2019, and in 2020 was held in a hybrid format due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Together, these confe-rences raised just over R770 billion in investment commitments across a wide range of economic sectors.
The fourth South Africa Investment Conference would have been held in November 2021, but we decided to move it to March 2022 due to several other events taking place at this time.
These include the local government elections, the COP26 climate conference and the Intra-African Trade Fair.
Another important reason for holding it next year is that there will be far greater COVID-19 vac-cination coverage by then, making both travelling and gathering easier.Although the fourth Investment Conference has been held over by a few months, our ambitious investment drive conti-nues.
Even in the midst of the challenging economic environment caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, which was exacerbated by the vio-lence and destruction that occurred in parts of Kwa-Zulu-Natal and Gauteng in July, companies continue to make good on their commit-ments and to look for other investment opportunities in South Africa.
In the last year alone, nearly R120 billion of investment commitments flowed into project con-struction or expansion.
This means that around 38% of the total investment com-mitments – or R290 billion – have to date flowed into the economy.
Some invest-ments have been delayed due to COVID-19, particu-larly in hard-hit sectors like property development and tourism.
Pharmaceuticals is an exciting new area of growth.
Aspen Pharmacare recently launched its R3.4 billion expansion, which it announced at the 2018 Investment Conference.
This investment has turned Aspen’s Gqeberha manu-facturing facility into one of largest global manufac-turing hubs for general anaesthetics and has also provided capacity over 100 million doses of the Johnson & Johnson COVID vaccine have been produced under contract.The World Health Orga-nization also chose South Africa to host an mRNA vaccine manufacturing hub with the Biovac Institute, which is a public-private partnership with govern-ment.
South African-born Dr Patrick Soon-Shiong and his company Nant-Works recently announced an ambitious initiative to build capacity for advanced health care in Africa.
In addition to the investments they will bring, these developments will also contribute to our collective ambition for the continent to manufacture 60% of its vaccine needs by 2040.Energy is another area of growth.
The 25 prefer-red bidders in the fifth round of our Renewable Energy Independent Power Producer Procurement Programme are together expected to invest around R50 billion into the eco-nomy.
The increase of the licensing threshold for embedded generation to 100 megawatts is likely to result in substantial private investment in electricity generation projects.
South Africa has recently secured an initial commit-ment of around R131 billion to fund a just transition to a low carbon economy by investing in renewable energy, green hydrogen and electric vehicles.
This commitment by the United States, United Kingdom, France, Germany and the European Union is in line with the Paris Agreement, which obliges wealthier countries to support decar-bonisation in the developing world.
These energy investments will help us overcome the debilitating load shedding that the country is currently experiencing, as new elec-tricity generation capacity comes online.
Several new investments in datacentres and undersea cables will not only bring in new investment, but will provide the infrastructure needed for the growth of technology and telecommu-nications industries.
An important part of our investment drive are the far-reaching structural reforms we are undertaking in areas such as energy, telecommu-nications, water and ports and rail.
These reforms will improve efficiency and competitiveness, bringing down the cost of doing busi-ness in South Africa, and encouraging greater private investment in our economic infrastructure.
We now have 13 special economic zones across the country, providing investors with targeted investment incentives, preferential tax rates and export sup-port.
These provide an attractive manufacturing base for companies seeking to supply both local and international markets.
Their value has increased further with the establishment of the African Continental Free Trade Area, which officially commenced trading at the beginning of the year.
While the rate of invest-ment has slowed due to the effects of the pandemic, and several projects have been delayed, the investment drive is beginning to gather pace once again.
As we make progress with the implementation of the Economic Reconstruction and Recovery Plan – with its focus on infrastructure, industrial development, employment and structural reform – the environment for investment will improve further.
Lodging GEPF complaints made easy
vukuzenzele unnamed
Members, pen sioners and beneficiaries of the Government Employees Pension Fund (GEPF) now have recourse when unhappy with the service they receive.
To ensure the GEPF members and their families are treated fairly, the board recently established an office to handle disputes.
The Government Employees Pension Ombud (GEPO) is an internal but independent office of the GEPF.
The GEPF is among the largest pension funds in the world, with over 1.2 million active members and more than 450 000 pensioners and beneficiaries.
The fund was founded and is regulated in terms of the Government Employees Pension Law.Advocate Makhado Rama-bulana has been appointed as the Ombud.
He says the office was established to assist people who are unhappy with the services of the GEPF.
It will be especially bene-ficial to people who cannot afford legal recourse.
Before people take their disputes to the Office of the Public Pro-tector or to the courts, they can seek mediation from the Ombud.The Ombud will inter-vene in matters that lead to unreasonable delays in the processing of payments due to claimants.
It may only mediate in complaints that have arisen within the past three years.Other issues within the GEPO’s scope include:
• The failure of officials to perform their duties in terms of the Fund’s law and rules;
• Breaking a commitment without a justifiable rea-son; and• Incorrect or misleading in-formation provided by the GEPF employees.Before lodging a complaint with the GEPO, a person must send a written com-plaint to either the GEPF, the Government Pensions Administration Agency (GPAA) or their employer, and give them a chance to settle the matter.“You must allow them 30 days to correct the issues that you identified.
If, after 30 days, your issues remain unresolved, you can submit a complaint to the Ombud,” explains Ramabulana.The Ombud cannot accept a case if there is already an official investigation under-way elsewhere.
“Within two weeks from the date that the complaint is received, the GEPO will consider [the case] and inform the complainant whether it can investigate and decide on the matter.” If the Ombud refuses to investigate a complaint, the complainant can write to the GEPO office within 21 days providing reasons why he or she believes the complaint falls within the GEPO’s mandate.
Report corruption via the anti-corruption hotline
Silusapho Nyanda
IF YOU SUSPECT corruption, fraud, theft or other wrong doing in the public service, you are urged to report it.
Curbing corrup tion in the public service remains a government priority and the National Anti-Corruption Hotline makes it easy for members of the public to report suspected acts of corruption.
The hotline was launched by the Public Service Com-mission (PSC) in 2004 and since then, more than 100 000 calls reporting alle-gations of corruption and maladministration have been received.
These calls by whistle-blowers have resulted in 24 035 cases of corruption, fraud and other crimes being investigated, says Public Service Commis-sioner Michael Seloane, who oversees all the work done by the commission.
Between 2020 and 2021, 337 cases were reported via the hotline.
Thirty-five of these involve appointment and procurement irregularities that are being investigated by the PSC.
The remaining cases were referred to other government departments or law enforcement agencies for investigation.
The Reconstruction and Development Programme (RDP) housing, tender and social grant irregularities are among the most common allegations made.“During the lockdown we received a lot of tip-offs through email.
We also have an automatic message recor-ding system for those who wish to call our hotline after hours,” Seloane says.He adds that since the lowering of lockdown levels, there has been a steady increase in the reporting of social grant-related fraud, especially Social Relief of Distress grants.To strengthen efforts to curb corruption, the State has capacitated law enforce-ment agencies with skilled personnel, and established the Fusion Centre.
The centre is a grouping of law enforcement agencies
that share information and resources in the fight against fraud and corrup-tion in the procurement of COVID-related goods and services.
What happens after a tip-off is made?Seloane says when a case is reported via the hotline, early resolution officers check that all the relevant information is provided.
This includes the details of who did what, when the alleged act took place, and why.He says if wrongdoing is found – be it procure-ment and appointment irregularities, bribery, RDP housing related corrup-tion, social grant fraud, illegal migration, assault, theft or fraud – the PSC either recommends reme-dial action to the relevant department or refers the case to the Hawks, SAPS or Anti-Corruption Task Team for further investiga-tion.Cases the PSC refers to departments for investiga-tion, include:
• Public servants doing extra work for money without consent of the departments• Undeclared conflicts of interests, and • Unethical behaviour.
Seloane says the PSC gives government departments 60 days to investigate and close a case.
He says the depart-ment then informs the PSC of its findings.
“If we are happy with the steps taken by the department, we will close the case, but if we are not satisfied, we revert back to them.”Anonymity guaranteedWhen a whistle-blower does not want his/her identity revealed, the PSC hotline officer takes down only their contact details.
This is important because if extra information is needed, the PSC must be able to contact them.Whistle-blowers who report cases to the PSC hotline are assured protec-tion if they want to remain anonymous, says Seloane.
He explains that early resolution officers have been trained to ensure that a whistle-blower’s identity remains protected.Seloane says South Africans must report corruption because it steals from the poor and stops development, which prevents the country from moving forward.
Celebrating World Down Syndrome Day
Kgaogelo Letsebe
Down Syndrome International has confirmed March 21 as World Down Syndrome Day, to celebrate those fighting for the inclusion of their loved ones who are living with the illness.
Down Syndrome (DS) is a chromosomal disorder arising at the time of conception.
Mpumalanga-based medical practitioner Dr Midah Maluleka says: "There is an extra number 21 chromosome (Trisomy 21) which causes delays in physical and intellectual development.
There’s no definite cause for this extra chromosome.
It has been proven to have no relation to age, socio-eco-nomic status, race or religion.
It is also not hereditary.
"Maluleka adds that DS is the most common chromosomal disorder in new-borns.
"One in 1 000 babies born in first world countries with one in 650 babies born in developing countries , like ours, are affected.
At least 80% of children affected by DS are born from mothers under the age of 35, despite wom-en over the age of 35 being deemed to be at higher risk of having a child with DS.
"She says because the dis-order can be picked up at conception, there are some tell-tale signs to look out for.
"In the early stages of pregnancy, a 1213 week ultrasound scan is advised.This accurately measures the thickness of fluid behind the baby's neck, called the nuchal translucency.
This is often larger in babies with DS.
Another prenatal test is an amniocentesis.
This is when small amounts of amniotic fluid is collected and sent for chromosome analysis.
This test is about 98% accu-rate for diagnosis.
"Maluleka says that chil-dren with DS are able to live full, healthy and long lives.
“Although there’s no cure, people with DS benefit from loving homes, appropriate medical care, early inter-vention, educational and vocational services.
Due to advanced medical care, most people born with DS today have a life expectancy of approximately 55 years.
People with DS have the same emotions and needs as any other person and deserve the same oppor-tunities and care," says Maluleka.North West-based teacher Tshepo Kekana says, "Not all special needs students need to go to remedial and special schools.
There are a few who cope in mainstream schools.
With continued learning, support and patience, the students can flourish.”
A professional public service
Vukuzenzele unnamed
When I was elected to the position of President of South Africa, I said that building an efficient, capable and ethical state free from corruption was among my foremost priorities.
Only a capable, efficient, ethical and development-oriented state can deliver on the commitment to improve the lives of the people of this country.This means that the Public Service must be staffed by men and women who are professional, skilled, selfless and honest.They must be committed to upholding the values of the Constitution, and must, as I said in my inaugural speech, “faithfully serve no other cause than that of the public”.Over the past two weeks, public consultations have been underway on an im-portant policy document that will give greater impetus to our efforts to bolster, streng-then and capacitate the civil service.The draft National Imple-mentation Framework to-wards the Professionalisation of the Public Service aims to build a state that better serves our people, that is insulated from undue political inter-ference and where appoint-ments are made on merit.The framework was appro-ved by Cabinet in November last year and structured con-sultation with various sectors of society are now underway.Twenty-seven years into democracy, it can be said of the Public Service that while several pockets of excellence exist, we have serious chal-lenges in many government departments with regards to skills, competence and professionalism.All too often, people have been hired into and promo-ted to key positions for which they are neither suitable nor qualified.
This affects go-vernment performance, but also contributes to nepotism, political interference in the work of departments, lack of accountability, mismanage-ment and corruption.There is also the related problem of political and executive interference in the administration of the Public Service.
One need only to look at the instability in go-vernment departments when senior managers are swopped or replaced each time a new Minister is appointed.Directors-General (DGs) and provincial heads of departments (HoDs) are particularly affected.
In some departments, DGs, HoDs and executive managers have had stability of tenure, enabling the departments to function with little disruption.
In most of these departments where there is leadership stability, audit outcomes tend to be positive and public funds can be accounted for.
Where there is a high turnover of heads of department, there is often administrative turmoil.One of the key recommen-dations made in the draft framework is that the Public Service must be depoliticised and that government depart-ments must be insulated from politics.Professionalisation is neces-sary for stability in the Public Service, especially in the senior ranks.
Public servants must be able to continue doing their jobs “regardless of any changes of Ministers, members of the Executive Council or councillors wit-hin the governing party in charge of the administration, or changes to political parties after elections”.We are proposing a number of far-reaching reforms, such as extending the tenure of HoDs based on merit and performance, doing occupa-tion-based competency as-sessments and involving the Public Service Commission in the interviews of DGs and Deputy DGs.Introducing integrity tests for all shortlisted individu-als will help so that we can recruit civil servants who can serve honestly.
We also need to extend the compulsory entrance exams that we intro-duced in April 2020 beyond senior management.
Succes-sful developmental states have similar measures which help advance professionalism within the public service.As we note in the draft framework, “the bureaucracy must continue to loyally and diligently implement the po-litical mandate set by voters and the party, but to refrain from being political actors themselves.”We are suggesting a more rigorous approach towards recruitment and selection of public servants, induction and performance manage-ment.
This includes conti-nuous learning and a clear professional development path for every public servant.The draft Framework puts emphasis on the need to hold public servants accountable for irregularities, to do away with a culture of impunity in the mismanagement and misappropriation of state resources.Professionalising the public service involves training for accounting officers across all spheres of government on the applicable legislative provisions.The National School of Go-vernment (NSG) has a vital role to play in this regard.Professionalism is not only about having the right qualifications and technical skills, but also about having appropriate standards of res-pect, courtesy and integrity in dealing with members of the public.The public service is diverse, with a huge range of skills, qualifications and capabili-ties.
Many public servants have specialised skills that are necessary for the effective provision of services.
It is therefore not necessarily the case that we need a smaller public service: what we actu-ally need is a fit-for-purpose public service with suitable skills, a professional ethic and a commitment to serving the people.The men and women of the public service need to be capacitated to play their role in driving development and consolidating democracy.
This is our best guarantee of a capable state that serves the interests of citizens.I call on you to be part of the public consultation process around this draft framework, which is available on the NSG's website, and to make your voice heard.The Public Service does not belong to any one party, nor should it be the domain of any particular interest group.
It should not be a law unto itself.The public service belongs to the people of South Africa.
It must serve them and them alone.
Alcohol may damage your unborn baby’s health
vukuzenzele unnamed
Pregnant women have the responsi-bility to not drink because alcohol can cause a condition that affects a baby’s development.This is according to the Deputy Minister of Social Development, Hendrietta Bogopane-Zulu, who recently launched the 9-9-9 Foetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder (FASD) advocacy programme.The aim of the initiative is to encourage communities to help protect unborn babies by educating people, especially women of childbearing age, about the dangers of drinking alcohol while pregnant or breastfee-ding.“It is important for all women who are pregnant and those who wish to give birth to healthy babies to avoid alcohol.
The damage caused by FASD is perma-nent and irreversible, and children born with this condition have physical and intellectual problems,” said Deputy Minister Bogopane-Zulu at the launch.She added that South Africa is known to have a drinking problem, with the country ranking among the worst in the world for its levels of alcohol consump-tion.Deputy Minister Bogo-pane-Zulu recently visited different parts of the coun-try, educating women about the dangers of drinking alcohol while pregnant as part of the 9-9-9 FASD campaign.When she was in Boi-tekong in Rustenburg in the North West, she told residents that the levels of alcohol abuse in the town-ship are alarming.A four-month pregnant woman and resident of Boi-tekong, Basetsana Tlalang (28), who attended one of the campaigns, said she stopped drinking alcohol entirely after learning she was pregnant and said she is attending antenatal and information sessions at the clinic.
She urged other preg-nant women to immediately stop drinking alcohol and doing drugs.The Deputy Minister warned that there is no specific treatment for alcohol-related disorders – the only way to prevent them is to avoid alcoholic beverages during preg-nancy.
She encouraged pregnant women who struggle with not being able to stop drinking to visit their nearest clinic to receive assistance.
The Struggle to give South Africa a more human face
vukuzenzele unnamed
On 12 September 1977, Stephen Bantu Biko died in police custody in Pretoria Central Prison.Human dignity, the principle at the heart of his black consciousness activism, was denied to him.
In the words of the family lawyer Sir Sydney Kentridge, his was “a miserable and lonely death on a mat on a stone floor in a prison cell”.It remains a source of great sorrow all these years later to recall that Steve Biko was just 30 years old when he died.
He was cut down in his prime by those who feared the power and resonance of his ideas of self-liberation and his efforts to infuse black men and women with pride and dignity.He never got to see in his lifetime what he called ‘the glittering prize’, the realisation of a true humanity.
Writing about this ideal, he famously said: “In time we shall be in a position to bestow upon South Africa the greatest gift possible – a more human face.”When we won our freedom in 1994, we understood that the right to vote was just one part of our struggle for human dignity.Twenty-eight years into our democracy, we are confronted with many challenges, such as poverty, unemployment and inequality.
As a result, we often lose sight of how far we have come in giving effect to the principles on which our Constitution is founded and that anchored Steve Biko’s thought and teachings.In 1977 a heartless regime killed one of our country’s most promising leaders by depriving him of the food, water and medical treatment he urgently needed as a result of brutal beatings by the apartheid police.Twenty years later, in a 1997 judgment, the Constitutional Court said that fulfilling the fundamental rights of every citizen and striving to achieve their socio-economic rights is the hallmark of a democratic society aiming to salvage lost dignity.In South Africa today, we continue to work to fulfil the basic rights of every South African so that they may lead quality lives free of disease, hunger and deprivation.Successive democratic administrations have implemented policies to salvage the lost dignity of this country’s majority by providing education, health care, housing and basic services.In South Africa today, a decent education is a fundamental right.
The State invests in early childhood development, in supporting learning outcomes for our youngest citizens, and provides social relief through school feeding programmes to ensure young learners achieve the best outcomes possible.Through the National Student Financial Aid Scheme and various other forms of state support, thousands of young South Africans from poor backgrounds have been able to become doctors, lawyers, teachers, scientists, artisans and entrepreneurs.Government supports poor and vulnerable citizens through an extensive social safety net and provides work opportunities through mass public employment programmes.In the repressive South Africa in which Steve Biko died, freedom of speech was curtailed and political activism attracted detention or worse.In South Africa today, young people of the same age as Steve Biko was and even younger are at the forefront of activism for causes closest to them, and they are able to organise free of harassment or banishment.
Freedom of speech and association, the right to protest and the right to equality before the law is upheld for all.As a country, we have come a long way towards the fulfilment of human dignity, the principle that Steve Biko so cherished.
Yet, we still have so much further to go.Without a job, without a house, electricity or running water, without land, without skills or opportunities, millions of South Africans are still deprived of the lives they seek and deserve.
That is why government is working with social partners to build an inclusive economy, create employment, enable businesses to thrive and tackle poverty and hunger.In considering the relevance of Steve Biko’s life and legacy, we recall his powerful call to the people to be architects of their own liberation.
This call is as important now as it was back then.We must be focused on addressing our challenges to achieve a truly free and equal society.
We each need to play our part by using the foundational rights in our Constitution to build a South Africa free of poverty and hunger, underdevelopment, crime and violence.As Steve Biko urged, let us march forth with courage and determination on our common quest for true humanity.
va more human face
The N3 upgrade is empowering South Africans
Owen Mngadi
Mduduzi Jijana is the owner of the Disability Empowerment Movement, which is one of the companies that is currently benefiting from the R26 billion upgrade of the N3 highway between Pietermaritzburg and Durban in KwaZulu-Natal.The project, which is being spearheaded by the South African National Roads Agency SOC Limited (Sanral), is ensuring that entrepreneurs such as Jijana not only benefit but in turn create employment for others.
Jijana, who lives with a disability, says his company installs road signs between Hilton and Pietermaritzburg.
He employs 13 people and says the project has changed their lives.
“As people living with a disability, we have shown that we are capable.
We no longer rely on grants.
We do the actual work,” says Jijana.Sanral N3 Programme Manager Tsepo Matekane says his company ensured that 30% of the work was assigned to local companies with the ability to provide various services.
This created many opportunities for small businesses owned by youth, previously disadvantaged people and women.
“There are 108 small, medium and micro enterprises currently working on the various projects,” he says.Nokuthula Zondi of Ingqalabutho Yamalinda Multipurpose Trading was awarded a contract to supply soil and install water drainage pipes.
She says her company employed eight skilled workers, including drivers.
Zondi adds that women are as capable as men and her company has a good service track record.
“We understand the importance of time and meet all our targets to ensure the project runs accordingly.
We appreciate the opportunity and we hope more will come so that our company can grow according to construction levels,” she adds.
National government’s key projects Matekane says the Durban-Free State-Gauteng Logistics and Industrial Corridor development has an estimated budget of R26 billion and is one of national government’s key strategic integrated projects.
It is known as SIP2.The project will widen the
N3 with more lanes in each direction.
It also includes changing some of the major interchanges to improve traffic flow.The affected section of the N3 has over the years experienced traffic congestion, particularly during peak hours because the majority of cargo trucks from the Durban harbour use the highway to Gauteng and other inland provinces.
Some of the cargo truck drivers have caused accidents by not taking care on sharp curves.“Apart from resolving chronic traffic by creating greater mobility through the construction of additional traffic lanes, the upgrading of the N3 will result in increased safety.
Dangerous curves will be ironed out.
Unsafe intersections will be redesigned,” Maketane says.Sanral awarded three contracts in the last quarter of 2021, and construction work began between January and April.
The sections currently being upgraded are the 19 kilometre (km) stretch from Cato Ridge to Dardanelles, commonly known as Umlaas Road; the 26.6 km section from the Dardanelles Interchange to Lynnfield Park; and the 30 km stretch from Lynnfield Park to the Ashburton Interchange.
Matekane explains that SIP2 will strengthen the logistics and transport corridor between South Africa’s main industrial hubs, improve access to Durban’s export and import facilities and raise efficiency along the corridor.
He adds that the project is part of the National Development Plan 2030 and National Transport Master Plan 2050 and supports government’s Economic Reconstruction and Recovery Plan.To this end, government intends to develop a transport system that is consistent with the real needs of the people living in South Africa and caters for people with less money to spend on travel.Maketane says the upgrades will take between eight and 10 years to complete and road closures will be kept to the minimum.
He adds that motorists will be kept informed of traffic delays and the KwaZulu-Natal traffic authorities will help maintain traffic control.Sanral appeals to motorists to heed all warning signs, reduce their speed when approaching a construction site and to have consideration for other road users .
Child support grant misuse is illegal
More Matshediso
If you are aware that the child support grant received by a caregiver is being misused, you have the responsibility to report the matter to the South African Social Security Agency (SASSA).
According to SASSA Spokesperson Paseka Letsatsi, the child support grant is paid to the caregiver, but is intended for the care of the child.
The grant is currently R480 per month per child.
The child support grant was introduced by government to provide financial support to children who live in poor households.
“As soon as misuse is reported, an investigation is undertaken.
If the investigation finds that the money received does not benefit the child, SASSA may appoint someone else to receive and administer the grant on behalf of the child,” says Letsatsi.
He adds that it is critical that the primary caregiver, who actually cares for the child on a day-to-day basis, is the registered beneficiary.
“In an instance where a child moves from one caregiver to another, the grant is supposed to follow the child.
The original caregiver is expected to report to SASSA that the child is no longer in his/her care, and the new primary caregiver must then come in to apply for the grant,” adds Letsatsi.
Letsatsi says people who continue to receive child support grants after the children are no longer in their care, will be required to repay the amount received unlawfully.
They may also be subject to criminal prosecution if the intention to defraud the state can be confirmed.
The same consequences apply to people who misuse care dependency grants – which are given by SASSA to provide financial support to children with severe disabilities who require fulltime care, disability grants or older persons grants.
“If the money is used for alcohol, drugs or gambling, and not for the support of the person who qualifies for the grant, the same process of reporting should be followed,” says Letsatsi.
Who can apply for child support grant?
According to Letsatsi, any South African citizen, permanent resident or documented refugee who cares for a child, whether or not that child is his or her biological child, may apply for a child support grant, provided he/she meets the criteria listed below:
• The child and caregiver must live permanently in South Africa.
• The caregiver must be 16 years of age (in the case of child-headed households) or older.
• The child must be younger than 18.
• The grant recipient must be the child’s primary caregiver and the child must live with him/her.
• The recipient must meet the requirements of the means test (income test).
If the primary caregiver is single (never married, divorced or widowed), his/ her income cannot be more than R4 800 per month.
If the primary caregiver is married, the combined income of the applicant and his/her spouse cannot be more than R9 600 per month.
The spouse’s income will be considered in all instances – regardless of whether the couple is married in or out of community of property, under customary or Asian rites, are in a civil union or if the applicant and his/her spouse are not the child’s birth parents.
To report grant misuse, call SASSA at 0800 60 10 11 (toll-free).
“As soon as misuse is reported, an investigation is undertaken.
If the investigation finds that the money received does not benefit the child, SASSA may appoint someone else to receive and administer the grant on behalf of the child.”
Rising cost of living calls for a united response
Over the past few months, South African consumers have been hit by steep price increases that have dramatically affected their quality of life.
It has become increasingly more expensive to buy food and other essentials, to pay for basic services and to use public or private transportation.
While these rising costs affect everyone, low-income households are feeling them the most.
The latest Consumer Price Index for April 2022 published by Stats SA shows there has been little respite for hard-pressed South Africans.
Food inflation was recorded at 6.2 per cent.
The most basic foodstuffs cost more than a year ago, with staples like cooking oil recording the highest increases.
The price of fuel, which affects the price of almost everything else, has risen by a third in the twelve months to March 2022.
South Africa is not alone in this regard.
A recently published poll for the World Economic Forum shows that nearly a quarter of people globally, including those in developed economies, are struggling financially due to rising prices.
These increases, particularly the price of fuel, are the consequence of events over which we have little control.
The ongoing conflict between Russia and Ukraine has had a significant impact on the price of fuel and food.
Both countries are major exporters to international markets of fertilisers, grains and oilseeds that are needed for a range of items such as cooking oil.
Another factor is lower agricultural output due to extreme weather events caused by climate change, such as flooding and droughts.
While many of these events are beyond our control, government is doing what it can to shield the South African from current and future price increases.
One of our greatest advantages as a country is a strong, independent Reserve Bank that has managed to keep inflation within a narrow target range, well below what many other countries are experiencing.
We recently announced that the fuel levy will be suspended for another two months to August, which will bring some relief to households.
The suspension of the levy has provided essential relief to South Africans since it began in April.
Since the suspension of the levy comes at a significant cost to public finances, which affects other programmes of government, it will be difficult to continue this indefinitely.
There are, however, other things we can do.
Improving our nation’s food security is vital to withstanding this and future shocks.
We have a strong agricultural sector that continues to grow and create jobs.
To further increase agricultural production and strengthen our food sovereignty, we are investing heavily in improving local capacity, supporting commercial and small-scale farmers alike and helping more people to grow their own food.
Through the Presidential Employment Stimulus, input vouchers have been given to over 65,000 smallholder farmers, and work is underway to reach 250,000 such farmers.
Government is also providing subsistence farmers with fertilisers and equipment to produce food, and helping groups or individuals to start their own food gardens.
In provinces like North West, small-scale farmers are supported with agricultural ‘starter-packs’ of seedlings and poultry, in partnership with local agricultural colleges.
Through the Pro-Active Land Acquisition Strategy and the release of state-owned land for agriculture, we are supporting more small-scale farmers to expand their businesses and make them commercially successful.
We are also focusing on establishing more publicprivate partnerships to support the expansion of black commercial farming through initiatives like the Partners in Agri Land Solutions and the Agricultural Development Agency.
To enhance biosecurity and safeguard animal health against diseases like foot-and-mouth, we are strengthening our animal movement control measures and vaccine production capabilities.
In addition to boosting local food production, our extensive social grants system and zero-rating of basic goods helps to protect the poor from rising costs.
Through free basic services like water and electricity for indigent households, we can ensure that no family goes without basic services.
To get through this difficult period, all of society should get involved.
For our part, government will continue to monitor the situation closely and will do everything within its power to protect South Africans from unsustainable increases in the cost of living.
Corporate South Africa should ensure that consumers do not pay more for food than they have to.
We welcome the indications from food manufacturers and retailers that they are putting measures in place to help consumers get more for their money.
In March this year the Competition Commission released for public comment the terms of reference for a market enquiry into the fresh produce market.
It noted that the cost of fresh produce has been increasing at above-inflation levels, and that this has had a disproportionate effect on the poor.
The inquiry will examine if there are any distortions in the value chain that make food more expensive.
We will use our competition policy to protect consumers against unjustifiable price increases and anticompetitive practices by businesses, as we did during the COVID-19 pandemic.
The ongoing process of structural reform of our economy will support these efforts.
Reforms in the energy, transport and telecommunications sectors aim to reduce the cost of electricity, logistics and data in the long term through greater competition and efficiency.
We should be paying less, not more, for these services in the future.
Though oil prices and extreme weather are events over which we have little control, there is still much we can do, as government, business, labour and communities to help the people of South Africa through this difficult time.
Government prepares for COVID-19 spike
Allison Cooper
PREPARATIONS FOR A POSSIBLE increase in COVID-19 cases are underway with the government and the private sector building field hospitals, purchasing personal protective equipment and ensuring that South Africa manufactures ventilators.
South Africa’s coro navirus disease (COVID-19) cases are expected to increase in the coming weeks and government is working hard to ensure the health sector is ready.
“We have been buying person-al protective equipment from across the world and supporting local companies to produce them here,” confirmed President Cyril Ramaphosa.“We have been improving the infrastructure in hospitals, set-ting up temporary hospitals and finding more beds for COVID-19 patients,” he added.By the beginning of June, over 27 000 public hospital beds were put aside for COVID-19 patients.
Once complete, field hospitals will have 13 000 beds.
Quarantine sites and field hospitalsPublic Works and Infrastructure Minister Patricia de Lille said: 1 751 facilities have been marked for as proposed isolation sites, representing over 129 600 beds nationally, in all 44 districts and eight metros.
358 facilities have been identified in the Western Cape, repre senting over 27 500 beds.
395 facilities have been assessed by the Department of Health, representing 35 759 beds.
32 hospitals in the Eastern Cape, 19 in KwaZulu-Natal and 10 in Mpumalanga have been identified for renewal and repair as field hospitals.
The Cape Town Interna-tional Convention Centre, the biggest field hospital in the country, has 862 beds.
It admitted its first 10 patients on 8 June.
In the North West, teams are making hospitals bigger by building additional structures.
SA youth are a source of inspiration and hope
vukuzenzele unnamed
The words of Frantz Fanon that ‘each generation must discover its mission’ come to mind every time I have an opportunity to speak with young South Africans.
No matter where they live and no matter what they do, they each have a burning desire to change the world.
While they certainly want to improve their own lives, they also want to achieve a better society and a better world.
They see themselves as agents for fundamental transformation.
Throughout history young people have been a driving force for change.
In just the last few decades, young peo-ple have waged numerous struggles against injustice, from the 1968 student upris-ing in Paris, to the anti-war movement in the United States in the 1960s, to the an-ti-colonial struggle in many African and Asian countries, to the fight against apartheid, to the Arab Spring.
Most recently, young peo-ple have been at the forefront of the #BlackLivesMatter movement that has gained global support in the wake of the killing of George Floyd in the United States.Over the past few weeks, activists around the world have also been demanding the removal of symbols that glorify the barbarity and vi-olence of the slave trade and colonialism.
At an Oxford University demonstration recently a protestor carried a placard with the words ‘Rhodes must Fall’, the rallying cry of students in our own country five years ago.Young people across the world have found common cause.
They are tearing down statues and symbols of racism, demanding the decolonisation of educa-tional curricula, and calling for institutions to address racism and social exclusion.And so, as we paid tribute to the generation of 1976 on 16 June 2020, we also salute the youth of post-apartheid South Africa, the worthy in-heritors of this noble legacy.The mission of 1976 gener-ation was to dismantle bantu education; that of today’s youth is to take forward the project of national reconcilia-tion and transformation.In time to come it will be said that this year, 2020, marked the start of a new epoch in human history.Not only has coronavirus had a momentous impact on people’s lives and liveli-hoods, it has also shaken up the global social order.The manner in which the pandemic has taken hold has been a reminder of the interconnectedness of the human race and of the deep inequalities that exist be-tween countries and within countries.The pandemic presents an opportunity to ‘reset’ a world that is characterised by crass materialism, selfishness and self-absorption not just on the part of individuals but whole societies.Young people are telling us that the essential values of integrity, compassion and solidarity must be the hallmarks of the new socie-ty that will emerge, and that they are determined to be the champions of this new, better world.In the discussions I have had with young people I have said that we should never underestimate the power of an idea, because ideas can and have changed the world.
Ideas have spurred human progress and they are what will enable us to chart a new path in the post-coronavirus era.
These young people have turned their ideas into ac-tion.
They have not let a lack of resources hinder them.
They have carved a niche for themselves in a number of sectors from high-tech to environmental sustainability.
Now more than ever we will look to the innovative and pioneering spirit of our youth to come up with solu-tions to the unemployment crisis that benefit them, their communities and society.At the same time, I chal-lenge our country’s youth to craft and design programmes that will enable us to meet our developmental goals.In 1961, revolutionary Cuba sent legions of young student volunteers into the mountains and villages to construct schools, teach liter-acy and train new educators.
It is still held up as one of the most successful literacy cam-paigns in modern history.Our young people must develop social upliftment initiatives and they must lead them.Just as they took up the struggle for equality in higher education, the consid-erable energies of our youth must also be brought to bear to fight for equitable access to health care, for the trans-formation of land ownership and, most importantly, for gender justice.Like all South Africans, I have been deeply disturbed by a surge in the murder of young women at the hands of men.
These are shocking acts of inhumanity that have no place in our society.Youth-led civic activism, awareness raising and peer counselling are vital tools in our efforts to eradicate gender-based violence from society.
At the same time, we must strengthen our justice system, ensuring that perpetrators are brought to book, bail and parole conditions are tightened and that those sentenced to life spend the rest of their lives behind bars.While this needs society-wide action, I call on young men in particular to take up the struggle against gender-based violence.
Unless we end the war that is being waged against South African women, the dream of a new society will remain elusive.Those of us who were part of student movements during the apartheid era are often asked what we think of the young people of today.
There is a temptation to retreat into nostalgia about ‘the glory days’ of student politics and youth struggle, never to be replicated.But just as the youth of yesteryear defined their mission, today’s youth have defined theirs.South African youth of 2020 more than meet the high standard set by their prede-cessors.
They are optimistic, resilient and courageous, of-ten in the face of the harshest of circumstances.They are a source of inspi-ration and hope.
Through their actions, they are build-ing a world that is more just, equal, sustainable and at peace.
Young people across the world are calling on institutions to stop racism and social exclusion.
Mom with comorbidity beats COVID-19
Silusapho Nyanda
INSAAF MOHAMMED says it is very important for South Africans, especially those with comorbidities, to take responsibility for their health.
People with comorbidities – such as asthma, hypertension, chronic kidney disease and diabetes – could experi ence more severe coro navirus (COVID-19) symptoms, and may even die as a result of the strain the virus puts on their bodies.
Fortunately, when Cape Town-based occupational therapist and mother of three Insaaf Mohammed (40) tested positive for COVID-19 while ill with asthma, she was able to manage both conditions and did not be-come seriously ill.Mohammed contracted COVID-19 from her hus-band, who works at the Groote Schuur Hospital’s laboratory.
Mohammed’s seven-year-old son also test-ed positive.After testing positive, all three self-isolated at home.
“We self-isolated in our bed-room, while my mother-in-law – who has diabetes and hypertension and thankfully didn’t contract the virus – took care of our other two children,” says Mohammed.According to the West-ern Cape Department of Health, people with hy-pertension, diabetes and chronic kidney disease are among the most common comorbidity sufferers of COVID-19.As of 25 May, people with the following comorbidities showed serious symptoms of COVID-19;
• Hypertension, 58 percent• Diabetes, 56 percent• Chronic kidney disease, 17 percent• HIV , 16 percent• Asthma or chronic respiratory disease, 15 percent• Cardiac disease, 11 percent• Obesity, 13 percent• TB, 13 percent• Cancer, two percent• Other chronic illnesses, 16 percent.
Mohammed says her worst fear was experiencing serious respiratory compli-cations from COVID-19.
“I experienced tiredness, coughing and tightness of the chest, which my asthma pump resolved.
My symp-toms were not as severe as my husband’s, who had body aches, nausea, a tight chest, shortness of breath, blocked sinuses, thick phlegm on his chest and a fever.
My son had a fever for three days, but recovered quite fast once he overcame his symptoms,” she says.Mohammed’s family had been following protocols at work and home, to avoid contracting the virus.
“My family was understanding, caring and supportive, and brought us supper every evening, but sometimes your community can be uncaring and the harm caused on social media is scary,” says Mohammed.The Western Cape De-partment of Health says that keeping hydrated and monitoring your blood glucose, blood pres-sure and temperature are key to managing COVID-19, especially for patients with comorbidities.In addition, the department advises people with comor-bidities to:
• Take medication correct ly, as prescribed by your healthcare practitioner.
• Wash your hands with soap and water for at least 20 seconds, before you touch any medication.• Do not stop taking medication unless a healthcare practitioner tells you to and never share medication with anyone.• Try to do physical exercise for 30 minutes a day.
The department says that people with diabetes face a higher chance of experienc-ing serious complications from COVID-19, but the risk of getting very sick is lower if one’s diabetes is well managed.“In general, people with diabetes are more likely to experience severe symp-toms and complications when infected with a virus.
As diabetic individuals are at increased risk of severe COVID-19, ongoing social or physical distancing is recom-mended where possible.
Be-ing overweight is also a risk factor for severe COVID-19.
Weight loss, if possible, is therefore recommended.”Clean bill of healthAfter being in isolation for 14 days, Mohammed returned to work.
She says recovering from the virus changed her thought processes and per-spective on life.“You appreciate your fami-ly and the small things in life even more.
I want people in any working environment to take responsibility for their health and to educate their families and children, especially now that kids are back at school.
“Help your child find crea-tive ways to show affection to their friends, without going close and touching each oth-er.
Get your family to sterilise themselves before entering the home, leave your shoes in the garage if you can, take all your clothes off and shower before greeting your family and be more health conscious to protect them,” she says.The department advises people with comorbidities to eat healthily, get regular exercise, manage their stress, adhere to their medical treatment plan and follow all necessary preventative measures.
Insaaf Mohammed who suffers from asthma, has beaten COVID-19.
If you are showing any symptoms, such as a fever, cough, or short-ness of breath, contact the COVID-19 hotline on 0800 029 999 or WhatsApp the word ‘Hi’ to 0600 123 456.
Operation Vulindlela is opening the path to growth
Vukuzenzele Unnamed
The South African economy, like any other economy, cannot function, let alone grow, without efficient and competitive network industries.
These industries – which include electricity, water, transport and telecommunications – are the arteries through which the oxygen of the economy runs.
Structural problems in these areas have long been cited as some of the main constraints on South Africa’s economic growth.
Inefficiency and the high cost of network services are an impediment to doing business in the country.
To address and overcome these challenges, we set up Operation Vulindlela in October 2020 as an initiative of the Presidency and National Treasury to accelerate structural reforms in these network industries.
While the responsible government departments and entities drive these reforms, Operation Vulindlela monitors and identifies challenges and blockages.
Where needed, it facilitates technical support to departments.
The recent quarterly report outlines the progress made by Operation Vulindlela and the departments responsible for these reforms.
Across government, our focus is on reforms that are fundamental and transformative; that reshape the way our economy works.
This includes the auction of high-demand spectrum for mobile telecommunications, which was delayed for more than 10 years and finally completed in March.
The release of new spectrum will improve connectivity and bring down broadband costs.
The establishment of the National Ports Authority as a separate subsidiary of Transnet last year had been delayed for more than 15 years.
This was the necessary first step towards enabling private sector participation and increasing the efficiency of our port terminals.
We have also reinstated the Blue Drop, Green Drop and No Drop system for the first time since 2014 to ensure better monitoring of water and wastewater treatment quality.
We have published an updated Critical Skills List, also for the first time since 2014.
These are just some examples where, by focusing effort and attention on a limited number of priority reforms, this administration has been able to drive progress.
Through Operation Vulindlela, we have also been able to take a more focused and holistic approach to reforms, ensuring better coordination where multiple departments and entities are involved.
The best example of this is in the energy sector, where a number of important, interconnected reforms are underway to change the way that we generate and consume electricity.
Milestones include the raising of the licensing threshold for new generation projects to 100MW, allowing these projects to connect to the grid and sell power to customers.
We have revived the Renewable Energy Independent Power Producer Procurement Programme through the opening of new bid windows.
Changes to the regulations on new generation capacity have allowed municipalities to procure power independently for the first time.
And legislative reforms will ultimately give birth to a new competitive electricity market, supported by the publication of the Electricity Regulation Amendment Bill and the work underway to amend the Electricity Pricing Policy.
The process of unbundling Eskom is on track, with the entity meeting its December 2021 deadline for the establishment of a National Transmission Company.
By December this year we hope to complete the unbundling of Eskom’s generation and distribution divisions.
The quarterly report highlights a number of other important achievements, as well as areas where intensive work is underway.
In the water sector, Ope-ration Vulindlela has been providing technical support to the Department of Water and Sanitation to implement a turnaround plan for the granting of water use licences, with a target to process 80% of all applications within 90 days.
Work is also underway to establish a National Water Resources Infrastructure Agency that will ensure better management of our national water resources.
In the transport sector, inefficiencies in port and rail have severely affected our ability to export goods.
Work is underway to establish partnerships with private sector operators to invest in port infrastructure and improve the management of container terminals at the ports of Durban and Ngqura.
The White Paper on National Rail Policy, which was approved by Cabinet in March, outlines plans to revitalise rail infrastructure and enables third party access to the freight rail network.
Transnet Freight Rail is already in the process of making slots available for private rail operators on the network.
A fully operational e-Visa system has been launched in 14 countries, including some of our largest tourist markets.
A comprehensive review of the work visa system is also underway to enable us to attract the skills that our economy needs.
These reforms have been made possible due to better collaboration across government behind a shared reform agenda.
We call on business and investors to take advantage of the changes that are underway and turn their pledges and commitments into tangible, job creating investments.
Protect yourself from COVID-19 before winter
Allison Cooper
With South Africa’s COVID-19 cases increasing ahead of the predicted fifth wave and cold winter months around the corner, government con-tinues to urge the public to get vaccinated against the virus and stay up to date with their booster shots.
According to Health Minister Dr Joe Phaahla, on 25 April South Africa recorded a 137% increase in new COVID-19 cases, compared with the previous seven days, driven mainly by higher rates of infection in Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal and the Western Cape.
“COVID-19 remains a threat and we cannot afford to drop all prevention measures,” said Minister Phaahla.
“We again urge all those who are still not vaccinated to come forward and take the jab.
We are still under 50% of adults with at least one jab and that’s not good.
We urge young adults to come forward.
Natural immunity wanes after time and unlike vaccination, it cannot be booked.
We urge all those who qualify for boosters to take the opportunity before deep winter,” he added.
The Western Cape Department of Health says local and international data prove that vaccination against COVID-19 remains the best defence against the virus.
This is even more so for people who have a compromised immune system.
COVID-19 will not go away anytime soon.
To defeat it, we must eradicate it by ensuring that as many people as possible are vaccinated and continue to have their booster shots, the department said.
The fifth wave
Even though COVID-19 cases are increasing and the country is expecting to soon be in the fifth wave, it is not yet known how severe it will be.
“What is still uncertain is that our scientists tell us that a new wave will come through a new variant nicknamed Pi, which will need to be more transmissible and escape immunity.
But, at this stage, what is confirmed to be dominant are sub-variants of Omicron called B.4 and B.5,” said Phaahla.
Prevent transmission
You can help prevent the transmission of COVID-19 by ensuring:
• That your COVID-19 vaccinations (including booster shots) are up to date.
• That indoor spaces are well ventilated.
• Wearing a face mask when indoors and in crowded spaces.
• That you get the flu vaccine.
• That you know what to do when you have flulike symptoms.
• That you wash your hands and sanitise.
A new Randfontein for residents
vukuzenzele unnamed
The Rand West City Local Municipality is changing the face of Randfontein through the Mantrose Mega City Project, which will see thousands of houses being built for locals and will bring various job oppor-tunities to community
members.
The recently launched R11 billion project includes the building of a mall, clinic, railway line and other amenities in Middelvlei, which will ensure job creation and boost investor confidence in the area.
Rand West City Local Municipality spokesperson Tshidiso Tlharipe said the project will change the face of Randfontein.
“We are truly excited about this project and we know that it is going to bring about positive change for our people.
“Not only are we going to build 15 000 houses, we will also provide thousands of job opportunities for our locals and that’s ultimately what we want.
We want to absorb them in projects in their own town and we believe that this will uplift them as individuals,” he said.
The houses will consist of RDP and low-cost units.
“We have many business owners who will sub-contract in the development of this project, and locals who will do general work, such as brick laying, plastering and painting,” said Tlharipe.
This will go a long way towards accommodating the less fortunate and those who earn between R3 000 and R15 000 per month.
The owner and chairperson of Finsbury Middelvlei Consortium, Matshidiso Ngakane, said the project will give them an opportunity to be part of something big in their own communities.
“This is the first project of its kind in Randfontein and we are thrilled as residents.
The project will pro-vide much-needed job opportunities for locals for at least seven years and will see business owners able to sustain themselves as well,” said Ngakane.
VAT - the poor to be buffered
vukuzenzele unnamed
The effect of an increase in VAT to 15 percent from 14 percent is going to be buffered by South Africa's high level of social services.
That's according to Finance Minister Malusi Gigaba who says the increase, which takes effect on 1 April, will also see South Africans enjoy greater relief from below inflation increases in personal income tax rebates and brackets, and steps government is taking towards free higher education.
From 1 April 2018 old age disability grants will increase from R1 600 to R1 690 and to R1 700 in October.
Child support grants will increase from R380 to R400 in April, and to R410 in October.
This is a 6.6 percent annual increase.
Since October 2017’s Medium-Term Budget an additional R2.6 billion has been added to social grants to enable these increases.
“As highlighted by the President in the State of the Nation Address, government will ensure that social grants will continue to be paid without disruption,” said Minister Gigaba.
In its budget review, National Treasury said expenditure on social protection provides social security and a safety net for low-income South Africans.
It also improves social welfare service delivery to vulnerable individuals through policy and legislative reform, growing the number of social workers, improving access to Early Childhood Development and facilitating food and nutrition initiatives.
“Spending on social protection is set to rise from R193.4 billion in 2018/19 to R223.9 billion by 2020/21, growing by an average of 7.9 percent.
The number of social grant beneficiaries is expected to reach 18.1 million by the end of 2020/21.” An estimated 12.8 million people will receive the child support grant and 3.7 million people will receive the old-age grant.
2018 Tax proposals
■ An increase in value-added tax (VAT) from 14 to 15 percent, effective 1 April 2018.
■ A below inflation increase in personal income tax rebates and brackets, with greater relief for those in
Youth put to work
More Matshediso
When Bonolo Rakgalakana (18) passed grade 12 last year, she thought her dreams of becoming a mechanical engineer would have to be put on hold because her parents could not afford to pay university fees.
Rakgalakana, from Eersterust in Tshwane, thought that just like her sister she would have to join the national defence force and start fending for herself after matric.
Little did she know that her hard work had already secured a bright future for her.
“My older sister passed matric very well but my parents did not have money to send her to university, so she took a gap year.
She then applied and got a job at the national defence force.
I thought fate had the same in store for me, but my hard work was rewarded with a bursary from the Department of Public Works,” said Rakgalakana.
Rakgalakana’s twin sister Koketso, who also completed matric with flying colours in 2017, has also been awarded a bursary from the department.
The sisters were top achievers at Mamelodi Secondary School last year and received distinctions in all of their subjects.
“We did not have access to the internet, library books and good sports fields, but we attended extra morning and afternoon classes as matriculants,” said Rakgalakana.
Their names were on the Department of Public Works’ list of about 30 deserving learners from the class of 2017 who were awarded bursaries to pursue their career dream in the built industry.
The bursary is valued at R130 000 a year, for each learner, and covers tuition, accommodation, meals, textbooks, academic resources and a monthly allowance.
The department has invested R3,9 million in 2018’s first-year students.
Rakgalakana has enrolled at the University of Cape Town for a Mechanical Engineering degree.
“I have wanted to do it from when I was in Grade 10.
I'm looking forward to working for the Department of Public Works, as a way of giving back to show my appreciation,” she said.
The department’s Chief Director for Professional Services Vangile Manzini said the bursary programme was introduced in 2014 and aims to harness scarce skills in the built industry.
So far, the department has awarded bursaries to approximately 288 deserving youth from disadvantaged communities.
The beneficiaries pursue careers in engineering (civil, structural, transport, electrical, water care, mechanical, chemical and hydrology); analytical chemistry; construction management; quantity surveying; architecture; landscape architecture; urban and regional planning; interior design; horticulture; actuarial science and property studies.
In addition to providing bursaries, the department’s Artisan Development and Young Professionals Programme for learners who enrol at technical vocational education and training colleges, enables learners who obtain trade test certificates, for various trades within the construction industry, to become electricians, bricklayers, carpenters or plumbers.
Manzini said there are about 88 young professionals who have obtained professional registration since the introduction of the programme in 2007, and 53 artisans have been successfully registered since the implementation of the programme in 2015.
Beneficiaries come from schools across the country that are participating in the department’s schools programme.
Schools can join the programme through the district office if they are producing a pass rate above 65 per cent in maths and science, and are located in rural areas, farms or townships
Health’s fight against cancer goes nuclear
vukuzenzele unnamed
The Gauteng Department of Health has pumped R36 million into a new oncology facility that will ensure that cancer patients in Ga-Rankuwa, Tshwane and surrounding areas have easier access to treatment.
“I cannot contain my excitement at the launch of this much-needed biomedical equipment because to us, patient care and safety will always come first,” said Health MEC Dr Gwen Ramokgopa.
She said the first-of-its kind PET-CT imaging system in Africa serves as testimony to the department’s commitment to improving patient care.
“The facility brings advanced oncology care to patients, with a new leading- edge oncology diagnostics facility that harnesses multiple technologies to provide high-quality data quickly,” she said.
The oncology facility is fitted with new equipment including an advanced Philips Ingenuity TF PET/ CT which is a nuclear imaging technique.
It evaluates the structure and function of cells and body tissue providing oncologists with a patient-specific method of treatment.
“The system has already helped guide decision making for early diagnosis and assessment of treatment efficacy for over 105 patients since its installation.
We are thrilled with the results and the level of care we are able to provide to our people with this worldclass technology,” said Dr George Mukhari Academic Hospital’s Head of Nuclear Medicine Dr Trevor Mdaka.
The Hospital serves 1,7 million people both the North West province and Limpopo provinces.
MEC Ramokgopa said the launch marked the beginning of the end to suffer
A special tribute to our healthcare
vukuzenzele unnamed
The number of deaths from coronavirus recently passed the 2000 mark.
Among those who have lost their lives are healthcare workers, consummate professionals who cared for the ill, and were a support and comfort to those in hospital isolated from their families.
That the men and women carrying out this most noble and sacred of duties are them-selves falling ill and dying is a devastating blow.
They are on the frontline of fighting this pandemic.
They are working under great pres-sure and must carry the psy-chological strain of knowing they are at risk of contracting the virus.
They are the true he-roes and heroines of our battle against coronavirus.
We salute these brave South Africans who leave their homes, families and loved ones to report without fail for duty every day in clinics, hospitals and other health facilities.
There they provide medical care, administrative support and other services like cleaning and catering.
Just as they perform what is their professional duty, we too have a duty to them and to their families.
Their health and their safety must be paramount.
We honour them and uphold them as the men and women who have demonstrated they are prepared to risk their lives so that we may live.
For them to do their Herculean work they need our support as well as protection through the provision of personal protective equipment (PPE).
With the support of the Solidarity Fund and donations from many individual South Africans, businesses, foundations and other governments, we have been able to procure personal protective equipment for these brave frontline workers.
Where there have been shortages of PPE our hospitals are urgently attending to ensuring that they are available.
We know that access to PPE is not the only challenge our healthcare workers face.
Across the country clinics and hospitals are facing staff shortages.
This problem is being attended to.
To support the work that our frontline workers are performing around the country we are deploying Ministers and Deputy Ministers to each of the districts in the country to get a line of sight of specific challenges in these districts and to work with provincial health authorities.
We need to work together to safeguard the health of not just our frontline workers but the entire workforce.
There has already been sterling work done by unions in educating members around infection control and prevention and hygiene.
They are also supporting the work of the Department of Employment and Labour in conducting workplace inspections to ensure health and safety protocols are in place for returning workers.
Many of our trade unions are also providing coronavirus information to their members and employers are running awareness campaigns.
One of the challenges that has emerged in our country is the stigmatisation of people who have proven positive with coronavirus.
As a society, we have a collective responsibility to stamp out the stig matisation of people infected with the coronavirus.
There have been disturbing reports of individuals being ostracised from their communities and of communities protesting against coronavirus patients being admitted to local hospitals and clinics.
This must stop.
Just as we came together to promote acceptance of people living with HIV and stood firm against victimisation, we must show understanding, tolerance, kindness, empathy and compassion for those who are infected with this virus and for their families.
It is said that this stigmatisation is driven by fear of con tracting the disease and lack of understanding.
The best way to overcome our instinctive fear of illness and contagion is to observe the hygiene protocols that are in place.
The fear of infection is well-founded and real.
At the same time, we know what we have to do to protect ourselves and others.
We know what causes the virus and what we can do to protect ourselves from becoming infected.
We know we have to maintain social distancing, to self-isolate if we have come into contact with those infected and to present to a hospital if we have symptoms.
We must continue to be guided by facts and not rumours.
The time when anyone could say they do not know anyone who is infected or affected by coronavirus has long passed.
Now, more than ever, our friends, families, colleagues and neighbours need our empathy and support.
In the days, weeks and months that lie ahead, we will at times find ourselves despondent and fearful as we see the numbers of people infected and dying continue to rise.
It may be that things have gotten worse, but we are certain that they will get better.
Our scientists and medical advisers told us that the rate of infections will go up as we move towards our peak.
But it will certainly come down.
We pay tribute to the healthcare workers who lost their lives caring for the sick.
In their memory, let us keep ourselves and our fellow citizens safe by playing our part.
We shall overcome this virus and rebuild our society.
We have seen darker times and we have prevailed.
Let us spare neither strength nor courage as we work together to save lives.
Building a better life
vukuzenzele unnamed
From humble begin nings in KwaNon goma village, Kwa Zulu-Natal, 23-year-old Silondiwe Magwaza has conquered many obstacles to reach her dream of becoming a construction manager.
Growing up surrounded by poor infrastructure motivat-ed Magwaza to explore new ways to uplift her communi-ty.
She is now the first mem-ber of her family to obtain a degree.
Magwaza qualified at the University of the Witwa-tersrand in 2019, obtaining an undergraduate degree in construction studies.
“KwaNongoma has very poor infrastructure.
Looking at all the challenges faced by my hometown, I was encouraged to do something relating to construction so that I can be one of the people to change the current state,” she says.
Obtaining her qualification was no easy feat.
Magwaza says she found it difficult to concentrate due to her constant worry about fund-ing.
Then, the Municipal Infrastructure Support Agent (MISA) stepped in to assist.
"I used to stress a lot about funding as I come from a disadvantaged background.
That was until 2018, when I received a bursary from MISA.
This helped me to complete my degree with-out any more stress.
I had everything paid for, all I had to do was focus on my stud-ies,” she says.Magwaza is one of hun-dreds of students who pass through MISA’s youth development programmes each year.
The programmes provide funding and support and help students find job placements once qualified.
“I was really looking for-ward to our graduation cer-emony.
It would have meant a lot considering that I was going to be the first graduate in my family.
I am still hoping that we have our graduation ceremony, but this might not be possible given the corona-virus pandemic,” she says.The construction industry mainly consists of men.
“At times, women are made to feel small because their ability to bring about change is doubted.
Sometimes their voices are not heard.“I still chose construction management because I be-lieve that I have the power to change the industry and improve it where there is a need.
I have seen women in this industry making it to top positions and having influence.
I believe that I too can make it,” she says.
MISA bursaries are advertised on www.misa.gov.za from September, on Facebook @MISA, on Twitter @MISA_CoGTA and on Instagram @MISA_CoGTA.
Young farmer receives COVID-19 support
vukuzenzele unnamed
Nomagcinandile Suduka (27) is growing her family’s legacy and wealth by investing in agriculture.
The o wner of 4 U and 4 Me Primary Cooperative in Mooiplaas village received support from the Department of Agriculture, Land Reform and Rural Development’s Coronavirus (COVID-19) Relief Fund for her egg, livestock and vegetable farm.The department has awarded R1.2 billion worth of vouchers to farmers in need.
Suduka says her vouchers will help her grow the egg producing side of her business.
“I received three vouchers totalling R19 000.
A voucher for R12 000 to buy layer egg chickens, a voucher for R6 500 to buy feed and a R500 voucher to buy medicines.”She started her egg production farm by feeding her family’s traditional chickens with layer grower feed, which enables them to produce eggs without mating.
Her chickens now produce 50 eggs a day, which she sells weekly.Suduka, who also farms with 73 goats, 25 sheep and 25 cows, started farming in 2015 after obtaining a Public Management N6 Certificate from Ikhala Training and Vocational Education and Training College.
After realising that there were not a lot of job opportunities out there, she decided to take over the family’s then subsistence farm and turn it into a profitable business.Suduka says: “We grew up practising farming, so after graduating I decided to farm rather than look for a job.” This proved to be an inspired decision, as she has grown the number of goats and cows.
Suduka’s six-hectare vegetable farm produces maize, potatoes, peas and beans.
The maize is planted on four hectares, the potatoes on one hectare and the peas and beans share the last hectare.Suduka has learnt a lot from COVID-19, especially that her best assets are her hands and hard work.
Tips on how to start a garden:
• Make sure you know which plants your soil will support.• Ready your garden by first ploughing the land more than once without planting.• Add fertiliser.• Remove all weeds.To view the full list of regulations for Level 3, visit www.gov.za.AN EMERGING Eastern Cape farmer is one of the beneficiaries of government’s Coronavirus Relief Fund.
Nomagcinandile Suduka has converted her family’s subsistence farm into a small business.
Safe and legal abortion is free
Allison Cooper
There is no justification for women to use an illegal and unsafe abortion clinic if they want to end their pregnancy.
This is according to Deputy Minister of Health Dr Sibongiseni Dhlomo, who explains that, by law, all women have the right to terminate their pregnancy, for free, at a government hospital or clinic during the first 12 weeks.
“It pains us as government leaders to see our people leaving safe and free health services, for whatever reason, to go and spend the last money they don’t have to pay someone to put their life at risk.
There is no justification for women to correct an unplanned pregnancy with illegal and unsafe aborting because we all make mistakes.
Illegal abortion is not an answer,” says Dr Dhlomo.
The Department of Health has 346 public health facilities that provide safe termination of pregnancy services, he adds.
These are located in the Eastern Cape (46), Free State (16), Gauteng (25), KwaZulu-Natal (56), Limpopo (54), Mpumalanga (27), Northern Cape (six), North West (26) and Western Cape (90).
Illegal abortion complications
The Acting Director for Maternal Child and Women’s Health at the KwaZulu-Natal Department of Health, Phalanndwa Muthuphei, says women can face many complications when having an abortion at an illegal abortion clinic.
“The immediate complications include severe bleeding, tearing of the cervix, severe damage to the genitals and abdo-men, internal infection of the abdomen and blood poisoning.
“In the long-term, women could face a slightly increased risk of infertility, an ectopic pregnancy, a miscarriage or premature delivery or even death,” says Muthuphei.
“Women could also suffer emotional effects from an unsafe, illegal abortion, which include posttraumatic stress disorder, depression and problems with interpersonal relationships.
“Unsafe abortions can also lead to negative socio-economic impacts on women, children, families and communities,” she adds.
Legal abortion options
Muthuphei says women who want to end their pregnancy have safe and free options to do so at public clinics and hospitals.
“A choice of methods should be available, all of which must be performed by a trained and experienced doctor or professional nurse,” she adds.
The options, either medical or surgical abortion, depend on how far along the woman’s pregnancy is.
Medical abortion, which involves taking two sets of pills to end the pregnancy, can be done up until nine weeks of pregnancy.
“The patient would then abort the foetus at home and not at a clinic or hospital,” says Muthuphei.
Surgical abortions are performed by a registered nurse (up to 12 weeks) or a doctor (from 12 to 20 weeks).
According to the Choice on Termination of Pregnancy Act No 92 Of 1996 (the Act), an abortion can also be performed from 13 to 20 weeks if a doctor, after consultation with a pregnant woman, believes that:
• The continued pregnancy poses an injury risk to the woman’s physical or mental health.
• There’s a substantial risk that the foetus would suffer from a severe physical or mental abnormality.
• The pregnancy resulted from rape or incest.
• The continued pregnancy would significantly affect the woman’s social or economic circumstances.
An abortion can also take place after the 20th week if a doctor, after consultation with a registered midwife, believes that the continued pregnancy would endanger the woman’s life, result in a severe malformation of the foetus or pose a risk of injury to the foetus.
According to the Act, all women, even if they are a minor under the age of 18, have the right to terminate a pregnancy.
They do not need permission from their parents or guardian.
According to the Western Cape Department of Health, if you are a minor, you will be advised to talk to an adult you can trust and to bring someone with you to your appointment.
However, you do not have to do so.
Black economic empowerment a must for growth
Vukuzenzele Unnamed
In April this year, a landmark broad-based black economic empowerment transaction was concluded in the Eastern Cape that significantly improves the participation of black women-owned businesses in the energy sector.
A liquid bulk fuel terminal operated by BP Southern Africa in East London has been sold to Wasaa, an independent petrochemicals company.
Wasaa has acquired all the terminal’s moveable assets and a 20 percent share in berth-toterminal pipelines.
With the 2020 report by the Broad-Based Black Economic Empowerment Commission showing that most economic sectors are falling short of their black women ownership targets, this acquisition by a black and female-owned company of a liquid fuel terminal is a historic development.
It contributes to our national effort to redress inequality and ensure there is meaningful participation by the country’s majority in our economy.
Recently, I announced the appointment of the new Broad-Based Black Economic Empowerment Advisory Council, which comprises government, business, labour and other stakeholders.
It was established to champion the cause of economic transformation.
The council has its origins in a 2001 report produced by the BEE Commission.
This report emanated from an extensive study into the structure of the South African economy, and what was needed to transform the economy, grow black entrepreneurship, ensure greater black management and ownership of busines ses, and bring black women into the mainstream of the economy.
Next year, it will be two decades since the BroadBased Black Economic Empowerment (B-BBEE) Act – which established the council – was passed.
Our commitment to entrench and deepen economic empowerment is unwavering.
That is why black economic empowerment is an integral part of our economic reconstruction and recovery in the wake of the COVID-19 pandemic.
This is one of the reassurances I articulated to the Black Business Council earlier last month, where we discussed the state of B-BBEE in the country, the progress that has been made and what we need to do as a collective to build on our gains.
While there has been significant progress over the last two decades, there are some areas where there has been regression.
We have gone backwards when it comes to increasing black management control, upscaling skills development, entrenching enterprise deve lopment and broadening procurement to give opportunities to black women and the youth.
The apartheid government deliberately built a distorted economy designed to benefit white people.
The majority of South Africans were marginalised from the mainstream economy, with black entrepreneurs confined to small retail industries in the townships.
At the end of apartheid, black ownership of JSElisted companies was less than 1 percent.
This figure has not improved much in the past 28 years.
At the same time, there have been important private sector initiatives and deliberate measures by the state to facilitate greater and more meaningful participation of black people in the economy.
Between 2017 and 2020, nearly 500 empowerment transactions were submitted for registration to the B-BBEE Commission.
In key sectors such as construction, property, information and communications technology, tourism and transport, black ownership has exceeded targets.
Economic transformation and economic growth are intertwined.
There cannot be one without the other.
By integrating transformation into the process of industrialisation, we are advancing a more inclusive growth model that shares, rather than concentrates, wealth.
The Department of Trade, Industry and Competition (DTIC) is pursuing this goal through various programmes.
They include a support programme for township businesses, export-related training by the Industrial Development Corporation (IDC) to black, women and youth-owned businesses, and increased infrastructure budget to SMMEs in the Tshwane Special Economic Zone.
Through sectoral masterplans we are driving localisation that benefits black owned businesses.
For example, 10 black contract growers have been established with an investment of R336 million as part of the poultry masterplan.
Government has also launched a black exporters network that will connect black-owned companies in food, engineering products, auto components, beauty products and other sectors of the economy.
As part of our drive to create a new generation of black industrialists, last year government approved R2.5 billion in new support to about 180 black industrialists in the form of loans from the IDC and National Empowerment Fund (NEF) and grants from the DTIC incentive scheme.
Over the next three years a further R21 billion has been com-mitted by the IDC, NEF and other institutions to support black industrialists.
An additional R25 billion has been committed to support black, women, youth and worker-owned companies.
It is clear that much more work needs to be done to address the many challenges that black businesses face.
This includes the difficulty of accessing start-up and expansion capital and the ability of SMMEs to find markets for their products.
Black women-owned businesses, in particular, encounter difficulties in taking on large-scale empowerment transactions.
Breaking the cycle of underdevelopment through black economic empowerment is not just a moral imperative; it also makes business sense.
The continued exclusion of the black majority from the economy’s mainstream constrains economic growth, which ultimately impacts all business.
Expanding the country’s entrepreneurial base is fundamental to growth.
We have a shared responsibility to drive the effort to entrench B-BBEE because it is about eradicating inequality.
Unequal economies breed unequal societies, and unequal societies don’t grow and flourish.
It is not only wrong, but also unsustainable, for businesses to keep their management and ownership structures mostly white or male.
It is, after all, the South African public that are the primary consumers of their goods and services.
This should be reflected in diversity of hiring and management practices, in ownership and in procurement.
Broad-based black economic empowerment will only be achieved through partnership and a shared commitment to transformation.
The appointment of the new B-BBEE Council will help us to expand the frontiers of broad-based black economic empowerment.
I call on business, labour and industry to work with the council as it undertakes this vital work.
Support for businesses and workers
vukuzenzele unnamed
Starting and building a business is a lot like raising a family.
It takes time, patience, con stant support and consistent nurturing from infancy to maturity.
For many business owners, seeing a business that you grew from scratch struggling to survive, or even being forced to close its doors, is heartbreaking.
Since the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic, this has sadly been the situation facing many businesses both large and small, not just in our country but around the world.
The pandemic and the meas ures we have had to take to contain the spread of the virus have had a detrimental impact on businesses.
In dealing with the pandemic we have sought to adopt an evidence-based approach in both policy and practice, con sidering scientific research, clinical expertise and capabil ities, and impact on all sectors of the population.
We have sought to have a balance between saving lives and preserving livelihoods.We have sought to mitigate the impact of the successive lockdown restrictions on people’s livelihoods, or risk a second and possibly worse epidemic of poverty and hunger in future.
In the earliest days last year, we introduced measures such as the COVID Temporary Employer/Employee Relief Scheme (TERS), the COVID19 Loan Guarantee Scheme and various mechanisms to support small businesses to provide immediate and short-term relief to burdened employees and business owners.
In addition, the special COVID-19 Social Relief of Distress Grant and broadening access to existing social grants provided lifelines to indigent individuals and families.
Through these interventions we were able to mitigate the worst effects of the pandemic, preventing the closure of many businesses and the loss of even further jobs.
They pro vided a firm foundation for the Economic Reconstruction and Recovery Plan that we launched in October last year.
As part of that plan, we introduced the Presidential Employment Stimulus to provide income and livelihood support to millions of beneficiaries.
Through the stimulus, over 300 000 young people have been placed as school assistants.
More than 100 000 subsistence farmers are registered on the first-ever database of its kind where they have access to technical support.
More than 30 000 young people have been given opportunities in the cultural, creative and sports sectors.
Young professionals have been given opportunities in infrastructure development, healthcare, environmental conservation and a number of other sectors.
There are promising indi cations that our economy is steadily recovering, with growth and job creation in a number of sectors, from manufacturing to mining to agriculture.
At the same time we know that this ‘bigger picture’ is cold comfort to workers and business owners who have suffered immeasurably over the past year and a half, and were hoping to see their situa tions improve as the economy slowly opened up.The rapid rise in infections being fueled by the new Delta variant necessitated the imposing of tighter restric tions on the movement of persons, on the operation of certain businesses and on public gatherings, among others.
These were not been easy decisions to make, mindful of their impact on people’s livelihoods.Just as we did at the beginning of the pandemic, we engaged in deliberations with all social partners, business, labour and civil society to see what financially sustainable measures we could intro duce to support businesses and individuals in distress at this time.
The negotiations at the National Economic Development and Labour Council resulted in consen sus that the most practical and financially sustainable measure that can provide urgent relief is extending the COVID19 TERS scheme to sectors that have been affected by the adjusted level 4 restrictions.
To support businesses whose operating licenses and per mits expired between March 2020 and June 2021, we are extending their validity until 31 December 2022.
In addition, new business licenses or permits that are issued from the 1 July will also be valid until 31 December 2022, and no license fee will be payable.Over the past year, we have also been working consist ently to protect vulnerable workers whose jobs were at risk, particularly in hard-hit sectors like retail, food and beverage and the metals industry.
Through processes facili tated by the Commission for Conciliation, Mediation and Arbitration, some 58 000 jobs have been saved.
With the pandemic show ing no immediate signs of ending, businesses and work ers remain vulnerable.
It is thanks to the social com pacts we continue to forge that government, business and labour have been able to work together to buffer work ers and businesses from the pandemic’s harsh economic impacts.
For now, our priority is saving lives, and ensuring that we provide the necessary support, within our means, to prevent more businesses closing down and more jobs being lost.As we did with the COVID19 TERS scheme, government is firmly committed to con tinue its engagements with business and labour to find a way through these distressing times that both saves lives and protects livelihoods.
SANDF fights COVID-19
More Matshediso
The South African National Defence Force (SANDF) is helping fight the Coronavirus Disease (COVID-19) pandemic in Gauteng, which is currently the epicentre of the third wave.The SANDF is assisting with mass community test ing, screening and contact tracing, and is also lending a hand at hospitals.The South African Military Health Service was deployed in the province to ease the burden on healthcare workers.
A Medical Task Group has been stationed at Chris Hani Baragwanath Academic Hospital in Johannesburg.
With Gauteng recording the highest number of COVID-19 cases during the third wave, the hospital was named a pro vincial health facility and is now dedicated to patients with COVID-19.
Before assuming their duties, the Medical Task Group had to be vaccinated so that they could be kept safe while handling the increased number of positive cases and hospital admissions.
Medical Task Group Commander Colonel Fezeka Mabona, who is a professional nurse, says she works on the ground with other members of the group.
“The group comprises vari-ous healthcare professionals, including nurses, doctors, clinical associates and occu pational health and safety professionals,” she says.
The majority of the nurses have nursing qualifications at the degree level, with different specialities, including primary healthcare.
“Some nurses are theatre tr ained.
All of us have worked as general nurses, midwives, nurse educators and manag-ers in both the military and public health system,” she adds.
The group is divided into task teams and work with the hospital staff in shifts, according to the demand at the facility.
The team is currently providing healthcare services in six wards.
“The hospital staff is quite low to handle the number of cases at the moment.
It is very important for us to try as much as we can to assist them in order for all of us to avoid further strain on the health care system,” says Mabona.
She adds that the team spirit between nurses from the SANDF and the public healthcare system has been positive so far.
Due to the increase in COVID-19 cases, the hospi tal is also expected to receive more beds, to increase its 96-bed capacity to accommo-date more patients.
No quick fix for load shedding but real progress is being made
vukuzenzele unnamed
For every person living in this country, the past weeks of load shedding have been extremely frustrating and challenging.
The wide-spread public anger is wholly justified.With Eskom forced to once more implement load shed-ding to protect the national grid, individuals, house-holds and businesses have had to contend with power interruptions for up to four hours at a time.Load shedding is beyond an inconvenience.
It has dire consequences for nearly every part of our society from education to public safety to the provision of health services.
Large and small businesses alike are losing money and the energy crisis is endangering investment and our econo-mic recovery.There is a sense of despair that the situation does not seem to be improving and that there appears to be no end in sight to this crisis.Yet, even in the darkness of load shedding there is and must be an end in sight to our electricity crisis.
We are making progress in the implementation of the addi-tional actions I announced in July, even though the effects may not be immedia-tely felt.Given the unpredictable performance of Eskom’s fleet of coal-fired power stations, we will not be able to eliminate load shedding in the short term.
This is the unfortunate reality of our situation, which has had a long history.Our goal in the immediate term however is to reduce the frequency and seve-rity of load shedding by addressing power station breakdowns.This is a significant chal-lenge given the average age of power stations, and that in the past critical main-tenance was not undertaken at the necessary intervals.Eskom is urgently imple-menting measures to improve plant performance, which is a priority until new generation power projects are brought online.It is addressing the critical issue of coal supply, inclu-ding working with Transnet on the transportation of coal and monitoring the consi-stency of the supply from collieries to stations.
Eskom is also addressing the poor quality of coal, which often leads to plant breakdowns.
People with experience in running power stations are being brought back to help with plant operation, management and mentor-ship.To ensure that critical maintenance is undertaken without delays, discussions are underway to ease local content requirements for spare parts and to use the equipment manufacturers to undertake maintenance.To address the immediate energy shortfall, Eskom has since July worked on procu-ring emergency power, and in the last week launched power purchase program-mes for 1 000 megawatts of emergency capacity from companies with existing generation capacity and to secure imports from neigh-bouring countries.Government is giving close attention to the skills, experience and capabilities of the Eskom leadership to ensure that the company has the best people at all levels of the organisation.These interventions will help to reduce the severity and frequency of load shed-ding as we are bringing new power onto the grid over the medium term to increase energy supply.
Recently, government signed power purchase agreements for 420 MW with the first three preferred bidders under Bid Window 5 of the renewable energy programme.
The three projects are expected to con-nect to the grid in October 2024, and preparations are underway to sign with the remaining 22 preferred bidders.The amount of generation capacity to be procured from Bid Window 6 will increase 2 600 MW to 4 200 MW.The National Electricity Crisis Committee I appoin-ted in July is attending to the legislative and policy reforms that will establish a more efficient, competitive electricity sector.We have published for public comment the amendment that removes the licensing threshold for private generation projects.
This will pave the way for investment in larger, utility-scale projects that will rapidly add new generation capacity to the grid.The need for environmen-tal authorisations has been waived for transmission infrastructure in strategic corridors where risk to the environment is low.The timeframes for energy projects receiving land use authorisations and grid connection approvals has been substantially reduced, as has the National Energy Regulator’s registration pro-cess for generation facilities.While we work to increase the supply of electricity, we must increase efforts to reduce demand, particularly at peak times.We must come together as citizens to alleviate the pres-sure on the national grid.
This means using electricity sparingly, reporting illegal connections and paying for the electricity we use.
Businesses, households and government departments that owe Eskom must pay up so that Eskom is better able to undertake the critical maintenance that is needed to keep the lights.As we continue to expe-rience load shedding, there is a great tempation to give up hope that we will ever solve this problem.Yet, if we look just beyond the most immediate crisis, there are real signs of pro-gress and good reasons to be optimistic.As we work with greater urgency to fix the immedi-ate problem of an unreliable power system, we are also busy laying the groundwork for a sustainable, lasting solution to the country’s electricity woes.
Stem cell donation is a painless way to help save lives
Kgaogelo Letsebe
Mfundo Mxolisi Ngwenya (30) from Durban, KwaZulu-Natal, is one of the few black stem cell donors in the country.The South African Bone Marrow Registry (SABMR) says more people of colour need to register as donors because a patient has the best chance of finding a match in their ethnic grouping.
According to the registry, only 10% of the 78 000 registered donors are black, while 9.9% are Indian/Asian and 67% are white.
The SABMR says most donors donate through a process called peripheral blood stem cell collection.
It says the same stem cells found in your bone marrow are also found in your circulating blood.
A non-surgical, outpatient procedure is done to collect these cells.
Blood is removed through a needle in one arm, passed through a machine that collects stem cells and returned through a needle in your other arm.
Stem cells are important to cure blood diseases such as leukaemia, marrow failure or aplasia.
Ngwenya, a sports manager at the Durban University of Technology, says he first learnt about stem cell donation in 2012 when the SABMR held a roadshow at a local complex.
“I have always donated blood and am always eager to help, so I went for it.
It was really easy because they just took a swab in the mouth and said I should expect a call.” The sample taken from a potential donor’s mouth is tested and their details are stored so that they can be contacted if they become a match for someone in need of stem cells.“Last year, I received a call that they had found a perfect match.
The process to donate is quite lengthy and involves about 13 different tests, ranging from a physical [to check overall health] to blood tests.
I also had to inject myself on a daily basis,” he says.
The actual donation takes between six and eight hours.More donors neededNgwenya says people need to be made aware that the donation process does not involve surgery.
He says in some cases, cultural beliefs may stop people from beco-ming donors.The SABMR says it will be engaging traditional and religious leaders to promote stem cell donation.
It says the more black people come forward, the more lives can be saved.
Recovery on the horizon for SA
vukuzenzele unnamed
The jacaranda trees are in full bloom across the nation’s capital, heralding the start of summer.
After a long and difficult winter, the beginning of a new season should fill us with optimism.
When the National State of Disaster was declared in March, our immediate prior-ity was to contain the spread of the virus and provide emergency relief to citizens, communities, workers and businesses.Over the course of eight months and with the support of our social partners, we rolled out a comprehensive set of measures to limit the social and economic impact of the pandemic.We massively expanded social protection on a scale that has never been attempt-ed before in this country.
We are one of the few countries in the world where the right of access to social security is enshrined in the Constitu-tion, and we can be proud that during this grave crisis we gave practical expression to this right in many ways.
In addition to our existing social grants, which reach more than 17 million people every month, we topped-up the Old Age, Disability and Child Support grants.
We rolled out a Special Corona-virus Disease (COVID-19) So-cial Relief of Distress Grant, which has reached some six million people to date.
This was done within weeks of the National State of Disaster being declared.The scale of such an un-dertaking cannot be under-stated.
To bring this system online there was extensive collaboration between the South African Social Security Agency, South African Rev-enue Service, Home Affairs and many others.We set up a fully automated application and disbursement process, and integrated mul-tiple databases, including the National Population Register and the Unemployment In-surance Fund (UIF) database.
We set up new application channels like WhatsApp and USSD, and created systems with the commercial banks to enable banking detail ver-ification.
This is a remarkable achievement in a very short space of time.Alongside the measures we took to protect and sus-tain livelihoods, we also supported ailing businesses.
We provided relief to small businesses in the form of debt relief, finance, tax payment deferrals and other instru-ments.We implemented a COV-ID-19 Loan Guarantee Scheme to enable businesses to meet their operational ex-penses during the lockdown, and are currently looking at how this scheme can reach more companies in need.We provided income protec-tion to workers and relief to business owners through the Temporary Employer Relief Scheme administered by the UIF.These were all in direct re-sponse to an emergency and were by nature temporary.
Some are now coming to an end, while others have been extended as the labour mar-ket recovers.The measures we imple-mented went a long way towards protecting our soci-ety from the harsh winds of COVID-19.
The additional grants helped to prevent mil-lions of people from falling below the food poverty line.Had we not intervened to secure livelihoods and save businesses, the living condi-tions of our people and the circumstances of thousands of businesses would have been considerably worse.Now we are in a transition from relief to recovery.The emergency measures we put in place have laid a firm foundation on which to rebuild our economy.
As our focus now shifts to the imple-mentation of the Economic Reconstruction and Recovery Plan, our priority will be to stimulate growth and create jobs.There has already been progress in a number of areas.We are seeing new funding commitments for infrastruc-ture development following an infrastructure project roundtable last week.
A number of employment programmes under the Presidential Employment Stimulus have started.
We are pushing ahead with economic reforms in areas such as energy and telecommunications.Plans are being converted to action and commitments are being reflected in jobs and opportunities.It is all the more critical at this time, more so with the festive season approaching, that we do not become the architects of our own undoing.The greatest vigilance is required from us all to keep the virus at bay.A resurgence at any scale will not just dramatically reverse our health gains.
It will choke the green shoots of economic recovery that have emerged, and take us back from spring to winter.To prevent a second wave of COVID-19 infections, we must observe the public health guidelines that remain in place.When we fail to wear a mask at a social gathering, when we attend crowded events, we are not only putting ourselves and others at risk.
We are also putting our economic recovery in jeopardy.Let us all continue to play our part.The positive actions of wearing a mask, of maintaining social distancing and of regular hand washing helped us overcome the worst effects of the pandemic.
They are still our best defence.Let us remember the sacrifices we all had to make to contain the spread of the virus in the early days.Even as most social and eco-nomic activity has resumed, we must still observe all the health measures.
This is abso-lutely necessary if we are to rebuild our economy and put this crisis behind us.
HEALTHDrink water to avoid dehydration
Allison Cooper
Severe heat and not drinking enough fluids can lead to dehydration and heatstroke, which can be fatal.
According to the Western Cape Department of Health, the summer heat brings with it a high risk of dehydration, which is a harmful loss of water in the body.Dehydration is usually caused by not drinking enough liquids to replenish the water lost by sweating.
It can also be caused by an illness, that causes vomiting or diarrhoea; and by sweating from a fever.The loss of body fluids does not only occur during hard physical activities, but can also result from walking, gardening or riding a bike, especially in hot or humid conditions.When you are dehydrated, your body cannot function as usual.
Children younger than five, the elderly and people working outdoors are especially vulnerable to dehydration and heatstroke (a condition caused when your body overheats).Heatstroke is a medical emergency.
Seek medical help immediately for any of these symptoms:
• Feeling confused or your speech starts to become slow and unclear.• Nausea and vomiting.• Rapid, shallow breathing.• Heart starts to race.• A throbbing headache.
Dehydration warning signsSome of the early warning signs of dehydration include:
• feeling thirsty and light-headed.• a dry mouth.• tiredness.• having dark coloured, strong-smelling urine.• passing urine less often than usual.To stay hydrated and avoid heatstroke you should:
• drink more water than you usually do on hot days.• stay inside or in shaded areas.• wear a wide rim hat or use an umbrella.• always carry a bottle of water with you and drink regularly.• take regular breaks from the sun if you work out-side.
• cool yourself down by us-ing a spray bottle.
Babies and childrenParents and caregivers should pay extra attention to children and babies, to make sure they are hydrated.
Breastfeeding moms should feed their babies more fre-quently when it is very hot.Keep children indoors or in the shade, dress them in light clothing and wipe them down with a damp cloth to help them stay cool.
Remember to apply sunscreen when they go outdoors.If children younger than five have watery stools, keep vomiting and are tired, seek medical help immediately.
Also seek immediate medical care if your baby is unable to breastfeed or has sunken eyes and a sunken soft spot (fontanelle) on its head.In children, other dehydration warning signs include:
• a dry or sticky mouth.• few or no tears when crying.• urinating less or fewer wet nappies than usual.• dry, cool skin.• irritability.• drowsiness or dizziness.
Robust media more critical than ever
Vukuzenzele unnamed
We live in a country where not just journalists but any member of the public is able to freely articulate their views, their opinions and indeed their dissatisfaction without fear of retribution.
We have come a long way from the days where social protest by artists attracted banning orders, and critical reporting by journalists risked imprisonment or the closure of publications.Recently, the organisation Reporters without Borders published the 2021 World Press Freedom Index, a ba-rometer of the state of media freedom across the globe.Overall, it was found that there has been a decline in public access to information and an increase in obstacles to news coverage in a number of countries.
The report said that jour-nalism is “totally blocked or seriously impeded” in 73 countries and “constrained” in 59 others.
What is worrying is that media freedom has deterio-rated under the COVID-19 pandemic, with the various restrictions put in place having seemingly been used to curtail media activity in several places.In this latest report South Africa ranked 32nd out of 180 countries.
The index describes the state of media freedom in South Africa as “guaranteed but fragile”.
It notes that while the South African Constitution protects freedom and we have an established culture of investigative journalism, a number of impediments still hinder journalists in the performance of their duties.
This includes legal injunc-tions against taking images of National Key Points or re-porting on matters involving state security.
The report also notes an increase during 2020 of the intimidation of journalists, especially female journalists on social media.
Such intimidation is totally unacceptable, but is par-ticularly harmful when it is directed at female journalists and is occasionally accom-panied by threats of sexual violence.
This is a matter of great concern and cannot be allowed.At the same time, we take great comfort in the knowl-edge that we have a free, robust media that is able to report without fear or favour about those in power, about the most pressing social issues of our time, and to provide accurate, impartial information to the public.At a time when we are working together to rebuild our economy and our society in the midst of the Coronavi-rus pandemic, a robust media is more critical than ever.
The South African media has played a pivotal role in uncovering much of what we know today about the true extent of capture of the state by self-serving, corrupt individuals and entities.They sustained their re-porting even in the face of intimidation, disinformation and attacks on their person.Corruption is by no means the only challenge we face as a country.
The daily lives of many South Africans are still affected by poverty, inequal-ity and underdevelopment, poor service delivery and lack of access to opportunities.
If the media is to remain true to its responsibility to support democracy, our journalists must continue to report without fear or favour on the other issues of the day.
Their sustained coverage must include gender-based violence, crime in our com-munities and social ills like substance abuse.
Our media should provide accurate and impartial infor-mation, enabling the public to make informed decisions, to access opportunities and to improve their lives.
They should continue to produce journalism that goes beyond the headlines and front pages and that contrib-utes to human development.
They should report both the good news and the bad news, the progress we make and the challenges we face.
Credibility is key to sustain-ing trust between journalists and the public.
When journalists allow themselves or their platforms to be used to fight political battles or settle scores on be-half of vested interests, their credibility suffers.
When media disseminate stories that are inaccurate or that they know to be false, the public loses faith in them.
It is in the best interests of all who love this country and wish for it to succeed that our media is supported, and not hindered in its work.
As a society, let us continue to work together to jealously safeguard our country’s me-dia freedom.
It was hard won and without it, we cannot hope to flourish.
Tobacco addiction: Your health could go up in smoke
Kgaogelo Letsebe
TO COMMEMORATE World No Tobacco Day on 31 May, Vuk’uzenzelechats to a recovering tobacco addict about overcoming his addiction.
Katlego Makhanda, from Moiletswane in the North West, knows all too well how hard it is to stop smoking.
Until he stopped four years ago, Makhanda (28) used to smoke over 30 cigarettes a day.
He started smoking when he was 18 as a result of peer pressure.“I was not interested in smoking – it didn’t appeal to me until I was in matric and a group of guys I used to hang out with started picking on me for not being cool enough to smoke.” Makhanda initially smoked one or two cigarettes a day, but this increased over time.“After matric, I went to varsity and the freedom that came with not staying with my parents meant I could drink alcohol as frequently as I wanted.
This increased my rate of smoking.” In 2017, Makhanda fell ill and was hospitalised.
He was diagnosed with type 2 diabetes and for weeks was too weak to get out of bed.
“The doctor was very specific that managing my illness couldn’t be done if I continued to smoke.
That is when I decided to quit for good.”Dr Midah Maluleke from Mpumalanga says smoking is harmful to nearly every organ.“Illnesses such as cancer, heart disease, stroke, lung diseases, diabetes and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease can result from smoking.
“Research shows that smokers are 30% to 40% more likely to develop type 2 diabetes than non-smokers.
Smoking also creates difficulty in managing the disease,” he says.
Tips to stop smokingThe Cancer Association of South Africa (CANSA) offers the following tips if you are trying to stop smoking: Decide on a date to stop smoking and then do it.
Throw away everything that reminds you of smoking.
This includes cigarette packets, ashtrays, lighters.
Drink lots of water – it will help flush the nicotine from your body.
Inform your family and friends that you are trying to stop so that they can support you.
You may experience some dizziness, headaches or coughing once you have stopped smoking.
This is normal and should improve after a day or two and disappear within 14 days.Makhanda says his journey hasn’t been easy, but he is committed to not smoking.“The local clinic and staff provided me with support and information on the importance of living a tobacco-free life.
At first, the smell of cigarette smoke was tempting, but now I’m used to it,” he adds.
Fight crime, not migrants
Vukuzenzele Unnamed
Twenty-five years ago, our new democratic Constitution came into effect.
In adopting this Constitution, we affirmed our commitment to a society based on democratic values, social justice and human rights.
We were also making a complete break with our past.
This was a past of race-based social engineering that manifested itself through influx control, job reservation, group areas and the dreaded dompas.
When our forebears drafted the Freedom Charter in 1955, whose principles have been incorporated in our Constitution, and declared that South Africa belongs to all who live in it, they were seeking a society free from ethnic chauvinism, tribalism, racism and sexism.
It is therefore deeply disturbing how the recent incidents of anti-foreigner sentiment in parts of the country echo our apartheid past.
We have seen people being stopped on the street by private citizens and being forced to produce identification to verify their immigration status.
We have seen some political leaders making unscientific statements about immigrants to exploit people’s grievances for political gain.
We have seen marches being led on people’s homes and their dwellings raided for evidence of criminal activity.
We have seen people being attacked, hurt and even killed because of how they looked or because they have a particular accent.
This was how the apartheid oppressors operated.
They said some people could only live in certain areas, operate certain businesses or take certain jobs.
Under apartheid, black people were deemed suspects by default and stopped by police when found in so-called white areas.
Black people were forced to produce a dompas and if they could not do so, they were jailed.
We cannot allow such injustices to happen again.
The events in the Gauteng township of Diepsloot recently were a tragedy.
In the course of a single weekend, seven people were killed, sparking protests.
This loss of life is deplorable, as is the killing of a fellow African from Zimbabwe allegedly at the hands of vigilantes.
Crime is a serious problem in this country.
It affects all communities and people are justifiably tired of living in fear of criminals.
Contrary to what is claimed by some antiimmigration groupings and individuals, the perpetrators of crime are both black and white, male and female, foreigner and citizen.
Crime, not migrants, is the common enemy we must work together to defeat.
We cannot defeat crime through incitement, violence, intimidation and vigilantism aimed at foreign nationals, and specifically nationals from other African countries.
We acknowledge many communities are frustrated by the apparent inability of the police to deal with criminals.
Among the measures we are taking to capacitate the police is the recruitment of an additional 12 000 additional police officers.
We are also re-establishing community policing forums across the country.
These forums bring communities and police representatives together to improve local safety and hold police accountable.
Even as we intensify our fight against crime, there is no justification for people taking the law into their own hands.
At the same time, we recognise that illegal migration poses a risk to South Africa’s security, stability and economic progress.
Illegal migration affects service delivery and places additional burdens on essential services such as health care and education.
Like any sovereign nation, we have the right to implement policies and measures that guarantee the integrity of our borders, protect the rights of South Africans and provide that all who reside in our borders have a legal right to be here.
Controlling migration is the responsibility of government.
No private citizen may assume the role of immigration or law enforcement authorities by demanding that foreign nationals produce identification.
Under Section 41 of the Immigration Act, only a police member or immigration officer can ask someone to identify themselves as a citizen, permanent resident or foreign national.
If these officers believe, on reasonable grounds, that the person is in the country unlawfully, they may be detained while an investigation into their status is conducted.
When doing so, law enforcement authorities must respect that person’s rights and dignity.
Enforcement of migration legislation is a priority for government.
We are working to ensure that syndicates perpetrating immigration fraud in collusion with corrupt officials are brought to book.
Like all other businesses, foreign-owned businesses must obey the relevant laws, including health and safety regulations, have all the required permits and licences, and pay the necessary taxes.
We are a democracy founded on the rule of law.
Acts of lawlessness directed at foreign nationals, whether they are documented or undocumented, cannot be tolerated.
Today, our anger may be directed at nationals from Zimbabwe, Mozambique, Nigeria or Pakistan.
Tomorrow, our anger may be directed at each other.
Let us focus on defeating crime, no matter who commits it.
Flood relief for KZN and E Cape
Allison Cooper
Government will help residents of KwaZulu-Natal and the Eastern Cape rebuild their lives and homes after floods recently left a trail of death and destruction in the two provinces.President Cyril Ramaphosa said National Treasury will make money available for relief efforts to help those affected by the floods.“The Minister of Finance has said that R1 billion is immediately available,” he said.
President Ramaphosa will also approach Parliament for additional resources.
Government is working with the Solidarity Fund, private sector and non-governmental and community-based organisations to support victims.
The Solidarity Fund will set up a separate bank account for the flood disaster for South African and foreign donors to contribute to relief efforts.
Government will also provide vouchers to help households rebuild partially damaged houses, the President said.
“A comprehensive assessment of the economic cost of these floods still has to be made, but it is clear that it will run into billions of rands for the rebuilding of infrastructure and loss of production.” He added that the money set aside for the flood victims must reach those who need it the most.
“It will be critical, as we undertake this work, that all the re sources we mobilise are used for their intended purposes and reach the intended recipients.
There can be no room for corruption, mismanagement or fraud of any sort,” the President stressed.
Three-phased response
President Ramaphosa said government will respond to the disaster in three phases.
It will first focus on immediate humanitarian relief, ensuring that everyone affected is safe and their basic needs are met.
“Second, we will focus on stabilisation and recovery, rehousing people who have lost homes and restoring the provision of services.
“Third, we will focus on reconstruction and rebuilding,” he said.
The reconstruction and building phase will include the construction of houses in suitable areas.
The Department of Human Settlements has already begun an assessment of damages to houses across the province.
“An immediate task is to house those people who have been displaced by the floods and preparations are underway to provide temporary residential units,” said President Ramaphosa.
The Department of Public Works and Infrastructure is identifying suitable state land that can be used for resettlement.
Extensive damage
The rains caused extensive damage to houses; businesses; roads and bridges; water, electricity, rail and telecommunications infrastructure.
Schools, health facilities, police stations and magistrates’ courts were also affected, along with fuel and food supplies.
“It is estimated that over 270 000 learners were affected and over 600 schools were damaged, 16 of which cannot be accessed due to damage to connecting roads and bridges.
“Sixty-six public healthcare facilities were affected, although there has been minimal disruption to health services in most affected districts,” the President said.
Extensive work is under way to restore basic services to various areas in KZN.
More than 400 people have lost their lives in KZN and many people are missing.
One death has also been reported in the Eastern Cape.
Over 4 000 homes have been destroyed and 8 300 have been partially damaged, leaving 40 000 people homeless.
The President said that the South African Police Service (SAPS) and the South African National Defence Force (SANDF) have been leading search and rescue efforts.
This includes the deployment of SAPS personnel, diving teams, canine units and various vessels, helicopters and fixed-wing planes to the most affected areas.
“Aircraft from the SANDF have been used both for rescue and for the delivery of relief supplies – such as food, water, tents and blankets – to people in inaccessible areas.
“I have authorised the SANDF to bring in more personnel, water storage and purification supplies and engineering teams to assist with electricity and water restoration,” he said Government departments at national and provincial levels; municipalities; non-governmental organisations and businesses have been distributing basic relief materials such as food, blankets, mattresses, clothing, chronic medication, toiletries and cooking utensils.
Cabinet recently declared a National State of Disaster in response to floods.
The President described the floods as a humanitarian disaster that called for a “massive and urgent relief effort.
”“The lives, h ealth and well-being of thousands of people are still at risk.
The floods have caused great economic and social damage,” he said.The Port of Durban, which is vital to South Africa’s economy and is one of the largest and busiest shipping terminals on the continent, has been severely affected.
“The significance of the Port of Durban and rela ted infrastructure for the effective operation of the country’s economy means that this disaster has implications far beyond KZN,” said the President.
Progress has already been made in restoring operations at the Port of Durban, opening alternative routes for trucks to access the port terminals and clean up debris in the harbour.
Home Affairs ABIS to provide faster service
vukuzenzele unnamed
The new Automated Biometric Identification System (ABIS) will have an impact on the turnaround time for issuing ID documents and passports, and will reduce the duplication of identities.
The Minister of Home Affairs, Malusi Gigaba, recently announced ABIS which is said to change the way in which South Africans are identified and will form the backbone of how the public and private sector will manage the authentication of their clients.
ABIS will be the identification and security solution in support of national government’s drive towards modernisation of all departments for service efficiency.
The system will offer a single source for biometric authentication for South Africans.
“The ABIS project will be rolled out in phases over a five-year period.
Among others, implementation will entail migration of the current Home Affairs National Identity System (HANIS) data fingerprints and facial recognition, to the new ABIS with improved functionality, installation and configuration of ABIS infrastructure and building of system functionalities,” he said.
The country’s banks will be able to verify client identification quicker and the tourism sector will benefit due to quicker response times at ports of entry to capture and verify a traveller’s identity.
Minister Gigaba also said the SA Police Service will be able to search for suspects by matching latent prints against ABIS records.
The system will also lead to improved border control, which should create a competitive economic environment to attract critical skills, enable growth, increase foreign direct investment and create jobs.
Minister Gigaba said the ABIS project was initiated in January 2016 with the aim to replace the (HANIS), which is manually operated and outdated.
Minister Gigaba said one of the major challenges that were faced with HANIS was the imminent collapse of the over 20- year-old biometrics database which left the department with no choice but to carry out a technology upgrade.
Minister Gigaba added that the department partnered
with the Council for Scientific and Industrial Research to develop specifications for a new biometric database.
He said the department worked with the State Information Technology Agency to procure a future-fit Automated Biometric Identification system.
EOH was contracted to deliver the system after a thorough procurement process
NSFAS funding deadline looms
Sphelele Ngubane
Students and youth from disadvantaged and working-class backgrounds are encouraged to apply for funding from the National Student Financial Aid Scheme (NSFAS).
According to the Department of Higher Education and Training, NSFAS fund-ing is available to youth who have already completed their schooling or are already studying at any level in a higher education institution.
They can apply for funding from NSFAS to study at a public university or a technical and vocational education and training (TVET) college, but must do so before the closing date on 7 January 2022.
Applicants must be:
• South African citizens or permanent residents who want to register or are already studying at a public university or TVET college;
• South African Social Security Agency grant recipients;
• From households with a combined household income not exceeding R350 000 per year.
A brighter future
Nhlakanipho Mkhize (26) is a qualified electrician, thanks to NSFAS funding, which paid for his studies at Umfolozi TVET College in KwaZulu-Natal.
Mkhize, from Richards Bay, obtained a National Certificate (Vocational) Electrical Infrastructure Construction in 2017.
In addition to campus-based learning, he also had to complete workplace train-ing and pass a trade test.
Early on in his studies, Mkhize had the opportunity to put what he learnt into practice, ensuring that he gained confidence in the basic skills he was developing.“As a first-year student, I was already attending to electricity problems in my community.
Umfolozi TVET College provided us with both theory and practice.
“The advantage TVET students have is not just exposure, but also a compulsory workplace-based learning component to certify that they are competent before receiving their qualification,” he says.
Like many South African youth who come from underprivileged backgrounds, Mkhize knew he wanted to pursue a career in engineering, but no one in his family could afford college fees.
“When I became aware of the NSFAS funding, I knew it would lead to where I wanted to go – being an engineer,” he says.
Mkhize’s three-year NSFAS funding paid for his books, tuition and transport, and he received a personal care allowance.
No excuse for GBV
Vukuzenzele Unnamed
If a nation’s character can be judged by how it treats women and children, then we are falling desperately short.
The latest crime statistics released by the South African Police Service (SAPS) show an increase in rapes, domestic violence, and, perhaps most worryingly, in child murders.
Between July and September 2021, 9 556 people, most of whom were women, were raped.
This is 7% more than in the previous reporting period.
Of the nearly 73 000 assault cases reported during this period, more than 13 000 were domestic violence-related.
The rate of child murders has climbed by nearly a third compared to the previous reporting period.
We have said before that the violence perpetrated by men against women is the second pandemic that our country must confront, and like the COVID-19 pandemic it can be overcome if we all work together.
As government, we have a duty and responsibility to devote the necessary resources to combat crimes of gender-based violence (GBV).
Since the launch of the National Strategic Plan to Combat Gender-based Violence and Femicide (NSP) in 2020, there have been a several interventions to respond to GBV.
This includes far-reaching legislative reform, support to survivors through the provision of evidence kits at police stations and psycho-social services, the establishment of a Gender-Based Violence and Femicide Fund and supporting the network of Thuthuzela and Khuseleka Care Centres.
The SAPS has indicated we are making progress in reducing the significant backlogs in DNA analysis, which is crucial to securing justice for survivors of sex crimes.
The SAPS also operates 134 GBV desks at police stations around the coun try and is in the process of establishing more.
GBV is a problem of male violence.
It is predominantly men who are rapists.
It is mainly men who are perpetrators of domestic violence.
Because it is men who are the main perpetrators, it should be men taking the lead in speaking out and reporting GBV, in raising awareness, in peer edu cation and in prevention efforts.
It should be men in positions of authority in our educational system, whether as school principals, educators or lecturers, who should be making schools and places of higher learning safe spaces for female learners and students, and never, ever abusing their position of authority to demand sexual favours.
Men should also be playing a more formative and present role in their families, particularly in raising their sons to exhibit healthy, positive masculinity that is respectful of women and child ren.
Communities and community organisations must work with government to implement interventions that redefine masculinity so that we raise men with empathy, tolerance and respect.
Just as ending GBV cannot be the state’s responsibility alone, the onus cannot be on women and children to end the shocking levels of violence and abuse being visited upon them.
South African men need to play a greater role in preventing GBV.
They need to understand what constitutes GBV, especially sexual violence.
The latest crime statistics show nearly 4 000 people were raped in their homes or that of the perpetrator, and in 400 reported rape cases the victim and perpetrator had a relationship.
This suggests that some men do not understand that sexual activity without explicit consent is a crime.
Men must respect their wives and girlfriends and understand that being in an intimate partner relationship is never a justification for domestic violence.
If each man gathers two men and the three pledge to never rape a woman, never lay a hand on a woman and hold each other accountable to this pledge, we can start to seriously tackle GBV in our country.
It is not enough to intervene only once perpetrators have entered the criminal justice system.
We have to prevent GBV before it happens.
I call on all South African men, young and old, city dwellers and rural dwellers, modernists and traditionalists, married and unmarried, to be part of the prevention efforts that are sorely needed in homes and in our communities.
By refusing to condone violence against women and children, by not being party to it yourself and by reporting such acts, you are setting an example to your fellow men, especially to young men and boys.
You will be sending a clear sign that neither kinship, friendship or loyalty can be an excuse for not standing up for the rights of women and children.
ASIDI fast tracks school infrastructure
More Matshediso
Nkululeko Ralo Primary School is a good example of how positive results can be achieved when communities and government work together.
The school, based in Mthatha in the Eastern Cape, first started operating in a garage at the home of community member Nkululeko Ralo, who it is named after.
Over the years, the school moved a number of times as it expanded.
However, learners and teachers never had the benefit of proper facilities until recently, when they walked through the doors of their new, stateof-the-art school.
The school was completed as part of the Accelerated Schools Infra-structure Delivery Initiative (ASIDI), which was launched by the Department of Basic Education in 2011.
The initiative aims to replace schools that compromise the safety of learners and staff, due to a lack of proper infrastructure, water, sanitation and electricity.
To date, ASIDI has built 266 schools, provided 886 schools with sanitation, 1 030 with water and 372 with electricity.
The learners of Nkululeko Ralo Primary School now have proper classrooms and access to a resource centre, science laboratory, multi-pur pose and a nutrition centre.
A shared vision
Principal Koleka Gilman is passionate about improving education in Mthatha.
Her dream to start a school for her community began in 1988, and the following year, she began sharing her vision with the community.
“Our community was highly populated with a lot of children of school-going age who had nowhere to go for education.
My vision was welcomed by community member Nkululeko Ralo, who offered his home garage to be used as a school,” says Gilman.
She adds that Ralo went on to organise a container from Telkom and it was used as an additional classroom.
Ralo also arranged with two members in his community to offer their garages as additional classrooms.
Ralo sadly passed away in 2004.
In 1994, the school moved to the Eli Spilkin Hall, which was built by local businessman Eli Spilkin.
“In the same year, we received mobile toilets from the provincial Department of Education.
I then looked [for] and applied for a site where we would eventually build our school.
We received five hectares of land in 1998,” says Gilman.
Three temporary class-rooms were donated to the school by a non-profit organisation called Kats and Spaks, and the community built five mud classrooms.
Throughout the years, Gilman continued to advocate for the school to be improved and eventually, five classrooms were received from the Eastern Cape Premier’s Office.
In 2014, things took a positive turn when the Department of Basic Education, through ASIDI, issued a tender to build Nkululeko Ralo Primary School.
“Construction started in 2018 and the school was completed in 2021, thanks to ASIDI,” says Gilman.
Inspiring teaching and learning
Basic Education Deputy Minister Reginah Mhaule says the department wants to ensure that the physical infrastructure of every school inspires learners to attend school and learn, and educators to teach.
“The building of this school is government’s way of restoring dignity to rural and under-privileged school-going children and their teachers,” she adds.
A member of the school governing body, Nomuntu Dlengane, says the new school will motivate tea chers and learners to reach their full potential.
“Our learners’ attitudes and self-confidence have already improved due to the new infrastructure.
This will also help us maintain social distancing in our classrooms so that we can eliminate the spread of the Coronavirus Disease,” says Dlengane.
The school has 489 learners, 14 teachers, and two administration clerks.
It caters for grades R to 7 and is a non-fee paying school.
New health centre for Port Nolloth
Jauhara Khan
The seaside town of Port Nolloth in the Northern Cape will soon benefit from a full-service community health centre project which promises to enhance access to quality healthcare.
The project is being implemented by the Independent Development Trust (IDT) on behalf of the Northern Cape provincial Department of Health at a cost of about R150 million and is expected to open soon.
Once completed, the building will comprise all primary health facilities including a trauma unit, radiology, dispensary, psychiatric ward, maternity wards and paediatric wards.
Consultation rooms will be used for reproductive health services, a psychologist, dietician and other services once constructed.
Work on site also encompasses the construction of facilities for support services including administration and waiting areas, ambulance quarters and parking bays, overnight accommodation for paediatric mothers, a mortuary, kitchen and dining area, stores and maintenance area.
Port Nolloth, located along the Atlantic Ocean, is one of the most remote areas of South Africa with a population of just over 6 000.
It is served by a small government clinic that offers a community-oriented primary health care programme that monitors and works towards the improved health and well-being of families in that area.
The progress on the project is currently at 70 percent.
The contractor has been busy with installation of roofing in some of the buildings as well as internal plastering, painting and external work like paving, lighting and parking areas.
The project has created decent job opportunities.
A majority of these jobs were reserved for the local community and a lot of the work on site, such as glass fittings and cladding at the reception and waiting areas, were performed by local sub-contractors.
The IDT is an entity of the National Department of Public Works and supports all spheres of government with social infrastructure management and programme implementation.
POULTRY MASTER PLANPoultry plan amasterstrokefor local farmers
Vukuzenzele Unnamed
SOUTH AFRICA’S chicken and egg industry is soaring thanks to the Poultry Master Plan.
When Beverly Mhlabane took a trip to the shop to buy eggs, little did she know by the time she returned home an idea would be hatched for her own successful business.
“One day I went to the shop to buy eggs and found the eggs to be very expensive so I decided to buy 10 egg-laying chickens so we could get eggs for the house,” she says.A chicken lays an egg every 26 hours, which meant that Mhlabane would get an av-erage of eight or nine eggs a day.
Two months later, she started selling the eggs to neighbours.
This led to her converting her home garage into a chicken battery house.
At the time she also had a backyard vegetable garden.Mhlabane, a former engi-neer, always had plans to leave the corporate world to start her own property busi-ness.
In 2014, a while after acquiring her chickens, she bought two hectares of land in Benoni, Gauteng, with the intention to build apartments.
However, she couldn’t go through with her plan be-cause the land was demar-cated for agricultural use.
She decided to expand her small farming enterprise instead.
Long processA lack of infrastructure such as fencing, water tanks and electricity meant she only started using the land in 2016.The 49-year-old remembers how she used search engine Google to conduct research on farming.
Her baby steps paid off and today, she is the proud owner of Zapa Farm, a successful commercial agricultural en-terprise.
She progressed from using her two hectares of land to increase her egg production and grow spinach, kale, green pepper and tomatoes, which she sold locally, to eventually installing two vegetable tun-nels, cultivating 1.5 hectares and building 5 000and 2 000-capacity layer houses.
The farm supplies four Wimpy restaurants, Pick n Pay, a Holiday Inn hotel and local spaza shops, among others.“However, we have a shortage as our demand exceeds our capacity and, as a result, we source eggs from other local producers.
We have an approved environmental impact assessment for 120 000 layers and therefore need capital for the expansion,” she says.
Poultry Master PlanMhlabane had help in becom ing a successful farmer.
She is one of the many emerging farmers benefitting from the Poultry Master Plan, which was developed by government and industry stake holders, including poultry producers, farmers, processors, exporters, importers and organised labour.Signed in 2019, the plan aims to grow jobs in the industry through a number of measures that will be introduced over the next few years.It was as a result of the plan that the South African Poultry Association (SAPA) paid for Mhlabane’s water use licence and provided her with egg production training.
Support for farmersSAPA General Manager Izaak Breitenbach says the industry has invested millions into supporting black farmers and growing poultry production by 5%.
In just 12 months, 13 black contract grower farmers were established and 960 jobs were created.“The industry has invested R870 million to create markets for 50 black contract growers and to facilitate exports to create local jobs.
The industry has also done and paid for business studies for 19 black farmers who are in a programme with the Department of Agriculture, Land Reform and Rural Development,” he says.Forty independent black farmers are also being given poultry-related advice and training.
“The industry also has a database of 670 small, medium and micro enterprise farmers who we assist with relevant information,” he says.In addition, SAPA has made a book available to teach farmers about poultry production and developing their own business plans.Chicken producers have committed to R1.5 billion in fresh investment in their own production facilities withinw the next four years, which should create an additional 4 000 jobs.
The industry will also invest R1.7 billion into the establishment of 50 commercial-scale contract farm ers.
This investment will be supported by the industry and various government agencies.
Religious community vital in the fight against COVID-19
Vukuzenzele Unnamed
Recently many South Africans of faith have joined others across the world in important religious observances.
Members of the Jewish faith celebrated Pesach, Chris tians observed Easter and Muslims will soon be observing the holy month of Ramadan.
For the second year, these occasions have been marked in the midst of a devastating global pandemic that has cost the lives of more than 2.5 mil-lion people across the world.
Faith-based organisations have been vital to our natio-nal response to the disease, not only providing spiritual comfort and guidance, but also by caring for those most vulnerable to the effects of the pandemic, including through the provision of food, shelter and other social services.
Religion plays an important role in the lives of millions of South Africans, and con-gregational worship forms a vital part of their religious practice.
Being able to gather for religious services is also a welcome respite from a period of great hardship for individuals, families and communities.It is understandable that after more than a year of labouring under restrictions on religious gatherings that the faith community are keen for a return to a semblance of normality.
In recognition of the im-portance of congregational worship to the lives of our people, government has been engaging with the faith com-munity.
Leaders of the faith com-munity understand and ap-preciate the very real danger of a new wave of COVID-19 infections.
Since the outbreak of the pandemic, religious or-ganisations have taken proac-tive and positive measures to limit the spread of the disease among worshippers.
Another important factor is that during the various alert levels, religious organisations have incurred substantial financial losses that threaten their sustainability.
As go-vernment we remain commit-ted to working with the faith community to find workable solutions.
At the same time, public health and safety must be our paramount consideration.The religious community has shown innovation and initiative in the holding of worship at a time when there was a great deal of uncer-tainty over the trajectory of the pandemic.Congregational services were held online and wor-shippers were encouraged to pray in their homes instead of attending services.
This greatly aided the national ef-fort to contain the spread of the disease.
Religious leaders played a pivotal role in encouraging public adherence to health measures around important customary and cultural ritu-als like burials.
By equal measure, our people have demonstrated their commitment to adhering to public health protocols and to social distancing.
And they correctly appreciate that they must continue to avoid large gatherings .
We are now at a time where precaution is needed above all.
The Coronavirus pande-mic has not been eliminated, either in our own country or around the world.
The threat of a third wave is real and ever-present.International experience has taught us that we should not tempt fate.
Many countries have eased restrictions, only for there to be resurgences, necessitating the imposition of even harsher restrictions.
Large gatherings, whether religious or otherwise, have the potential to spread the virus, despite the application of measures around social distancing and sanitising.
Millions of South Africans have been observing an im-portant tenet of their faith.
In a country that enshrines the right to religious freedom, all effort must be made to support our people in the exercise of this right.
And in exercising this right, we need to make sure that we do not place the rights or the lives of others at risk.
This is a principle that the religious leaders I met with fully support and appreciate.
They understand the respon-sibility of all people of faith – indeed of all South Africans – to observe the practical measures put in place to protect people’s health and save lives.For more than a year, we have worked together as a society to contain this pan-demic.
Now as we work to overcome it, we need to reaffirm our shared determi-nation to act responsibly and cautiously.In doing so, we will be giving practical effect to the universal messages of hope, salvation, freedom and soli-darity that will be spoken of in the churches, synagogues, mosques and homes of our land in the days and weeks ahead.
Small business support during COVID-19
Dale Hes
THE UNCERTAINTY and financial strain placed on entrepreneurs and small business owners by the global coronavirus pandemic is being alleviated by a host of public and private support schemes.
Small business owners and informal traders are amongst the South Africans who are most heavily impacted by the lockdown.
In order to get through this difficult time, these business owners can take advantage of a number of in terventions that govern ment has put in place to assist them.
SMME Debt Relief FundFollowing the announce ment of the lockdown, the Department of Small Business Development immediately made a debt relief fund available for small businesses negatively affected by the COVID-19 pandemic.
More than R500 million has been made available through the fund, which small and medium enterprises must apply for through an online application process.
Here are the steps that need to be followed:1.
Your business must be registered on the SMME South Africa portal.
If you are not yet registered, you need to go to www.smmesa.gov.za to register.
2.
Once your registration is complete, you can apply for the COVID-19 SMME Debt Relief Fund.
You can find the application form on the Department of Small Business Development’s website.
3.
If you meet all the criteria (such as your business being tax compliant and 100 percent owned by South Africans), relief funding will be paid out to approved applicants within 12 working days.
If you own a micro-enterprise, then the Small Enterprise Development Agency is available to help you to apply to the debt relief scheme.
Requests for assistance must be emailed to debtrelief@seda.org.za.
Solidarity Response FundPresident Cyril Ramaphosa also announced the launch of the Solidarity Response Fund, which received a R150 million kickstart from government.
The fund allows organisations and individuals to donate to the nationwide effort to support small businesses and COVID-19 response efforts.
In the first two weeks of the fund, over R2 billion was donated, which will be channelled into relief efforts.
Support for spaza shopsGovernment has recognised the unique challenges that the pandemic poses to those working in the informal sector.
In this respect, Minister for Small Business Development Khumbudzo Ntshavheni has also released support packages for people working in this sector.This includes a dedicated support scheme for spaza shops.
“The spaza shop support will include dedicated networking, purchasing power and bulk purchasing through pre-selected and pre-approved wholesalers,” explains the minister.
This support will allow spaza shops to gain access to goods which they can sell.
Minister Ntshavheni adds that the scheme will also provide credit to spaza shop owners, to allow them to access the money needed to buy stock.
“This will be followed by a credit facility to enable spaza shop owners to continuously buy, even after the COVID-19 outbreak is over.”The department will also provide advice on how to successfully run their shops.
“We are also supporting them with business management support because we know that there are problems in spaza shops running their businesses to be profitable,” Ntshavheni says.
Helping informal tradersGovernment is also work ing on creating a package that will provide income relief to informal traders who have lost income due to the crisis.
Informal businesses also qualify for the SMME Debt Relief Fund but are required to register with the department in the same manner as other small businesses.
Help for our vulnerable citizens
vukuzenzele unnamed
Many countries around the world have imposed coronavirus lockdowns with a view to saving the lives of their citizens.
We have done the same in our country, but our lockdown has revealed a very sad fault line in our society that reveals how grinding poverty, inequality and unemployment is tearing the fabric of our communities apart.
There can be no greater anguish than that of a parent whose children cry out to them for food, but they have none to give.There can be no greater injus-tice than a society where some live in comfort and plenty, while others struggle at the margins to survive with little or nothing at all.Yes, these are the residual ef-fects of a fractured and unequal past.
But they are also a symp tom of a fundamental failing in our post-apartheid society.
The nationwide lockdown in response to the coronavirus has gravely exarcerbated a long-standing problem.Over the past few weeks, we have been confronted with distressing images of desperate people clamouring for food parcels at distribution centres and of community protests against food shortages.We have also had to contend with allegations both disturbing and disgusting.
A number of provinces have received reports that callous individuals, some of them allegedly government officials, are hoarding or selling food parcels earmarked for the needy and destitute, or diverting them to their friends and families.If there is found to be substance to these allegations we will deal with the individuals concerned harshly.With the declaration of a national state of disaster and the imposition of a nation-wide lockdown we entered uncharted waters.
South Africa has never had to deal with a public health emergency of this magnitude.We had to act quickly to save lives.
And we must acknowledge that in the days and weeks that have followed, the provision of support to our country’s most vulnerable citizens has been slower than required, and that lapses have occurred.However, the payment of social grants has proceeded relatively smoothly, and after a number of technical challenges, the food distribution system is being streamlined.Imposing a nationwide lockdown at very short notice presented several challenges.
We have had to weigh up the proportionality of the national response and the extent of restrictions we would need to impose.We ultimately chose to err on the side of caution.
And as the presentation by the Ministry of Health indicated recently, enforcing a lockdown at the time we did has slowed down the rate of infection and, more importantly, bought us time to prepare for a probable surge in infections in the coming weeks and months.We had to consider the impact on an already floundering economy in both the long and short term, and the impact of this substantial disruption on the livelihoods of millions of people.We had to consider what weeks of confinement to the home would mean for the employed not paid regular salaries, for the unemployed and those seeking work, for those in casual or seasonal employment, for those in the informal sector, for the indigent and for the vulnerable.Cabinet will finalise a set of measures to respond to the impact of the lockdown on the livelihoods of our people.
This has been preceded by a range of engagements with a number of stakeholders including business, labour, religious organisations, civil society and the Presidential Economic Advisory Council.The social partners have put forward a number of proposals on interventions that could address the immediate vulnerability of the poorest of the poor, most of whom rely on social assistance to survive.We will scale up welfare provision during this period to help households living below the poverty line.Even when the nation-wide lockdown is lifted, its effects will continue to be felt for some time to come.Those fortunate to have a steady income will be able to return to their jobs; but for millions of others this will be a lost month where they would otherwise have found temporary work, done business in the informal sector or saved money earned to meet their family responsibilities.
Food support is a short-term emergency measure.
It will need to be matched by sustainable solutions that help our most vulnerable citizens weather the difficult times that are still to come.I wish to thank the many NGOs, religious groups and ordinary citizens who are donating money and volunteer ing to help feed the hungry and destitute.Alleviating hunger is not an act of charity.
It is an imperative for any society that is founded on respect for human rights.We are at a point in our battle with the pandemic where complacency could prove disastrous.
I call on each and every one to remain vigilant, to continue to abide by the regulations, and to keep safe and keep others safe.As government we will be providing information on the direct interventions we are taking to shield our most vulnerable citizens from the grim prospect of starvation.Among the many difficulties our people face at this time, wondering where their next meal will come from should not be one of them.
Fighting corruption is everyone’s business
vukuzenzele unnamed
Corruption has no place in South Africa and government is calling on all citizens to act decisively to end dishonest and fraudulent conduct.
Corruption has taken centre stage in South Africa over the last few months in the wake of allegations of state capture and corruption scandals from private sector.
The allegations created a negative outlook for the country, especially with in vestors.In his State of the Nation Address President Ramapho sa said “we must fight cor ruption, fraud and collusion in the private sector with the same purpose and intensity”.
“We must remember that every time someone receives a bribe there is someone who is prepared to pay it.
We will make sure that we deal with both in an effective manner.”However government cannot fight corruption alone and is committed to rooting out corruption in all forms in the private and public sector while calling on all citizens to play their part.
Corruption is the abuse of public resources or public power for personal gain.
While the police and other arms of government are at the forefront in the fight against corruption, ordinary South Africans have their own role to play.
Several ongoing investigations and a number of arrests show that government wants
Support the police to make South Africa safe
vukuzenzele unnamed
There is growing public frustration and anger at the levels of crime in our country.
The recent robbery and gang rape of eight young women in Krugersdorp caused nationwide outrage and led to calls for decisive action against armed illegal mining gangs operating in the area.
The South African Police Service is to be commended for its decisive actions over the past three weeks in response to the gang rape and criminality in the area.
However, communities have rightly pointed out that it should not take a high profile crime for action to finally be taken against criminality.
The reality is that there are serious challenges facing policing in South Africa.
But we are working hard to overcome them.
Like all government departments, the South African Police Service is feeling the effects of the country’s fiscal crisis, several years of understaffing and state capture.
Police members also work in a dangerous environment where they often have to face violence, injury or death.
Crime in South Africa cannot be eradicated without a strong, capable, professional police force.
The capacity of the SAPS was one of the issues flagged in the report of the Expert Panel into the July 2021 Unrest, which we are taking steps to address.
Having restored much-needed stability to the leadership of the SAPS, our focus now is on closing capacity gaps that led to our law enforcement authorities being found unprepared to deal with the events of last July.
Understaffing and lack of adequate training has had a particularly dire impact on community and Public Order Policing.
Government has allocated funding for the recruitment of 12,000 new police trainees, and the first cohort is undergoing basic training.
The SAPS Public Order Policing Units will receive an additional 4,000 members this financial year, and arrangements are being made for appropriate training for members.
Drawing on the lessons of last July’s unrest, we are working to improve cooperation between law enforcement agencies and the private security industry in the fight against crime.
We need close coordina tion with all stakeholders, including business, so that resources and crime intelligence are shared to both improve public safety and deal with crimes that disrupt economic activity.
An example is the colla boration between Transnet Freight Rail and the SAPS to combat infrastructure theft and line sabotage.
These crimes seriously affect the economy as companies cannot move their products to the ports for export.
Another example of cooperation is between mine security, private security and the SAPS to fight precious metals theft.
As a result of these joint efforts, we are seeing progress in areas like Mpumalanga and Limpopo that have been flashpoints of instability as stolen metals were moved to illicit markets abroad.
Through its national inter vention units, the SAPS has also been making progress in combating organised crime, including drug syndicates, gangs and illegal mining.
The SAPS is establishing a task team to tackle illegal mining, alongside other task teams dealing with construction site extortion, copper and cable theft, and theft and vandalism of economic infrastructure.
Besides the successes of effective policing in tackling economic crimes, the hard work of the SAPS in dealing with broader crime often goes unacknowledged.
In the last financial year, for example, SAPS Crime Investigations secured 206 life sentences against 209 accused, of which 154 were for murder and rape.
The SAPS Family Violence, Child Protection and Sexual Offences Units secured 356 life sentences against 266 accused.
Suspect tracing operations resulted in over 13,000 arrests.
Given the high levels of crime in our society, there is clearly much more that must be done.
But these figures do show that many criminals are being arrested and successfully prosecuted.
They are not being allowed to get away with murder.
The Directorate for Prio rity Crime Investigation, known as the Hawks, achieved all of its targets for the last financial year, resulting in arrests and convictions, asset seizures, restraint and confiscation orders and forfeiture orders to the value of millions of rands.
The arrests and convictions secured by the Hawks included for illegal mining, damage to fuel pipelines, cash in transit heists and for police murders.
The Hawks have started work with the NPA Investigating Directorate on cases emanating from the state capture commission.
The SAPS has been sup porting the fight against gender-based violence, establishing more victim-friendly rooms at police stations and procuring nearly half a million evidence collection kits to be distributed to stations.
Policing cannot be suc cessful without the cooperation of communities.
For this reason, we are focusing on expanding the network of Community Policing Forums to improve both policing and community relations.
We commend the com munities that are taking responsibility for keeping their areas safe through street patrols, crime awareness campaigns and other activities.
Using the report of the Expert Panel as a basis for organisational reform, we are re-organising and reprioritising resources, improving capacity and strengthening law enforcement capacity across the board.
Being a policeman or policewoman must be one of the most difficult, pressured and dangerous jobs in our country, and often a thankless task.
While public frustration with crime is understandable, it is unfortunate that this should give rise to hostility towards our police, who continue to serve and protect.
As government works to provide the police with the necessary resources, training and budgets to perform their work, I call on all South Africans to join the effort to keep our streets and communities free of crime.
Let us acknowledge the hard work of our police and give them our full support in making South Africa a safer place.
Zulu-inspired food puts Cape Town restaurant on the map
Owen Mngadi
By showcasing pride in her heritage through traditional food, restau-rateur Mmabatho Molefe has put her restaurant, Emazulwini, on the world map after it was included in the 50 Next list.
This list names 50 of the world’s most exci-ting chefs, who have the potential to one day make the prestigious World’s 50 Best Restau-rants list.Molefe (27) established her modern Zulu res-taurant in Cape Town at the V&A Waterfront’s Makers Landing space in 2020, after she lost her job in the restaurant industry due to the COVID19 pandemic.
She says her cuisine was inspired by her upbringing in Kwa-Zulu-Natal where her grandmother used to cook traditional food.
She believes that this worked in her favour and helped her stand out from the rest in the 50 Next competition.Molefe says Emazul-wini, loosely translated as ‘the heavens’, has attracted interest from South Africans and inter-national visitors keen to try her Zulu-inspired food.
Makers Landing, which is a hub for South African food and cul-ture, is the perfect venue for her, she says.Emazulwini offers a seven-course set menu, which changes each season.
Molefe’s food is beautifully served, and includes dishes such as Isijingi – pumpkin porridge, roasted pumpkin,peach gel and brown butter ice cream; Isibindi nechakalaka – butter basted ox liver, yellow lentil chakalaka and onion jus; and Iqanda, Isibindi noshatini – tartlet with roasted tomato relish, chicken liver and biltong-cured yolk crème.“When you get to Cape Town, you may not get a true reflection of what South Africa is about, so I decided to stay true to myself with traditional food to show visitors what we eat.
I tell myself every morning I am telling my story; my interpretation of what Zulu food is.
I hope people embrace it for what it is.
We hope to elevate ordinary dishes to the exceptional.
Cape Town has a diverse population, apart from international tourists; they all get to learn about Zulu food,” she says.
The World's 50 Best’s 50 Next list It was Molefe’s way of modernising traditional food that scored her a spot on the 50 Next list, which each year celebrates 50 people aged under 35 who are shaping the worldwide food scene.
The competi-tion enables these brilliant young chefs to show off their cooking to the world.Molefe attended the awards ceremony in June in Bilbao, Spain, and says it was an inspirational day of discussions with other foodies.“I have been fortunate to get people from across the country and all age groups to come enjoy our food.
People are prejudiced against offal (the internal organs of an animal used as food) and I want to show them that if you treat it right, it can taste just as delicious as any other cut of meat.
I also want to promote nose-to-tail dining, to champion this sustainable way of eating,” Molefe says.Emazulwini also won the African Restaurant of the Year title at the fourth annual Luxe Restaurant Awards earlier this year.
Economic Reconstruction and Recovery Plan Emazulwini employs four people and Molefe has plans to grow her business.
She says South Africa’s rich heritage is a tourist drawcard.As part of the Economic Reconstruction and Recovery Plan, the government has identified the tourism sector as one of the critical intervention areas and a key driver of economic recovery.
The Department of Tourism, the private sector and other stakeholders collaborated to develop the Tourism Sector Recovery Plan, which will help form strategic partnerships between government and industry to ensure improved visitor experiences.
This will be done by introducing e-visas, promoting tourist safety and making it easier for tour operators to get licences.
v
Save money: Buy zero-rated goods
Allison Cooper
While the incre asing cost of living in South Africa is taking its toll on citizens, especially those from low-income households, you can ensure that your money goes further when shopping for groceries by buying zero-rated goods.Zero-rated goods are certain basic foods that people do not have to pay tax on, which means they are sold at a cheaper price.
People who buy food off the zero-rated list can get a little more for their money, which helps them to put nutritious food on the table.According to Statistics South Africa (Stats SA), food and non-alcoholic beverages (NAB) cost 8.6% more in June this year than they did in June 2021.Stats SA said the food products that have increased the most are bread and cere als (which includes maize meal), meat and oils and fats – all of which are staple foods in many households.Bread and cereal products have increased by 11.2% since June 2021, up from 8.4% in May this year, when the Consumer Price Index (CPI) increased by 1.1%.
The monthly increase was 2.6%, with notable price rises for maize meal (5.2%), brown bread (3.2%) and macaroni (3%).
In addition, meat prices increased by 9.5% from June 2021 to June 2022., and cost slightly more than they did in May 2022.
Oils and fats increased annually by 32.5%, compared with 26.9% in May when the CPI increased.
The high cost of sunflower oil, in particular, is putting extra strain on budgets.
Save with zero-rated goodsZero-rated goods were introduced by government in 1991 to help low-income households.
Since the initial introduction, more items have been added to the list.According to the South African Revenue Service, zero-rated foods are taxed at a rate of 0% – this means people pay 15% less for these goods because they do not have to pay VAT.These items include:
• Brown bread• Dried mealies and mealie rice• Brown bread flour (excluding wheaten bran)• Samp• Eggs• Fresh vegetables and fruit• Dried beans• Lentils• Maize meal• Rice• Pilchards in tins or cans• Vegetable cooking oil (excluding olive oil)• Milk, cultured milk, milk powder and dairy powder blend• Edible legumes and pulses, such as peas, beans, peanuts, etcSanitary towels (pads) are also zero-rated, as are maternity pads and panty liners.
Senior citizens must also ask their local shops if they give pensioners a discount, on certain days, on goods that are not zero-rated.
We must act now and together to end violence against women
vukuzenzele unnamed
It has been a tragic start to Women’s Month.We are once more confronted with the dark and ugly side of our society.Last month, a group of men and women shooting a music video at a disused mine near Krugersdorp were attacked by armed assailants who gang raped eight of the women.These horrible acts of brutality are an affront to the right of women and girls to live and work in freedom and safety.While they pursue the suspects in this crime, the South African Police Service must also pay immediate attention to the concerns of the community of West Village, where the incident occurred, who say they are under siege from armed gangs in the area.Rapists have no place in our society.
We call upon communities to work with the police to ensure that these criminals are apprehended and prosecuted.
Our communities must not shelter criminals in their midst.There is always someone in our communities who knows something, who heard something or who even witnessed something.
The problem is many of us choose to keep quiet because the perpetrator is a friend, a partner or a colleague.
Or we are just afraid and fear victimisation.
It is important to remember that all tip-offs received by the SAPS Crime Stop contact centre are treated confidentiality.I call on anyone who has information about this crime to report it to the authorities so the perpetrators can be arrested.Given the size of this problem in our country, it is no longer possible to avoid responsibility for reporting sex crimes.According to a new legal provision that has come into effect, in addition to our moral obligation, we all now have a legal duty to report to authorities when we have knowledge, reasonable belief or suspicion that a sexual offence has been committed against a vulnerable person.
It is now a crime not to report such a sexual offence.This is part of one of three laws that I signed earlier this year that strengthen the fight against gender-based violence and offer greater support and protection to survivors.Among other things, the laws expand the scope of the National Register of Sex Offenders, strengthen the vetting process, and introduce additional cate-gories of sex offences.Processes are underway to put these laws into effect.
These include training of prosecutors and magistrates, issuing directives on bail to all SAPS officials, and revising charge sheets to include the newly created offences.We are determined that all these building blocks are in place so that our law enforcement authorities and courts can investigate and prosecute gender-based violence more effectively.Gender-based violence and femicide is a deep-rooted societal problem.It is not enough for perpetrators to be apprehended, tried, convicted and sentenced.We must work together to address the drivers of gender-based violence in our communities, including patriarchal attitudes and practices.Eradicating gender-based violence demands that we act together as a people.
This means promoting positive attitudes around gender equality in our communities, at our places of worship and in our own homes.
As men, we should demonstrate our intolerance to sexism, patriarchy and gender-based violence in how we treat our partners, colleagues, mothers, sisters and daughters.Whether as individuals, organisations, businesses or employers, we must be part of the national effort in every way we can, whether volunteering at a shelter, supporting community policing forums or joining awareness campaigns in our schools.Just as gender-based violence is all of society’s problem, it is all of society’s responsibility to bring it to a decisive end.We have made a start, but as the terrible crimes in Krugersdorp remind us, we need to do much more and we need to act with greater urgency and purpose.
Bursary opportunities for young people
Kgaogelo Letsebe
Sonia Malinga (23) from Piet Retief in Mpumalanga says being a Shoprite Group bursary recipient has ensured a promising future for her.
Malinga received the bursary from the South African retailer in 2018.
She applied for the bursary after finishing high school at Hoërskool Piet Retief.
“Growing up, I initially wanted to be a doctor, but later I started exploring other options.
I read about supply chain and logistics management and was almost instantly attracted to it.
I remember I used to sit and watch the trucks drive in and out of my hometown and wonder who was ensuring that the quality and quantity of goods were correct and that they arrived at the correct delivery point.
That’s when I found my passion,” says Malinga.
Malinga obtained a BCom Honours degree in Logistics Management at the University of Johan-nesburg and started her career with Shoprite as a distribution centre trainee manager in February 2021.
She was recently promoted to store replenishment analyst.
Being part of the Shoprite Group has broadened Malinga’s knowledge of the retail industry.
“It has taught me even more about logistics management and enabled me to continuously develop my skills and advance in my career,” she says.
How to applyApplications for the Shoprite Group’s all-inclusive bursary programme are open for the 2023 academic year.
The bursary ranges from R45 000 to R70 000 per annum, based on the field of study and institution.
It includes tuition fees, books, on-campus accommodation allowances and work back agreements.
Basic entry needs include being a South African citizen, having completed matric/grade 12 and not being older than 27 years.
Bursaries are available in the following fields of study and applicants should be in their particular year of study at the time of their application:
• Pharmacy (first, second, third and fourth year)• Retail business management (first, second and third year)• Accounting (second, third and fourth year)• E-commerce: UI design (second and third year)• Food sciences (second, third and fourth year)• Information technology (second and third year)• Logistics and supply chain (third and fourth year).
Port of Durban creates a sea of opportunities for SA
vukuzenzele unnamed
Recently, I visit ed the Port of Durban to see for myself the work being done to make the port more efficient and competitive.
After a briefing with the senior management of Tran-snet, I toured the harbour in a pilot boat, which is usu-ally used to guide large ships through the entrance channel to the pier.
Seeing the workings of the port from the water, one is reminded of its vast scale and complexity.
If the port does not function efficiently, the entire econo-my suffers, from importers and exporters to consumers.
On the other hand, if the port works well it can drive economic growth and position our country as a ga-teway to the region and the continent.
When I visited Durban in October 2019, many local businesses and port users raised concerns with me about the performance of the Durban Port.
Shipping companies, in particular, expressed concern about truck congestion and waiting times, ship berthing delays and anchorage times, poor maintenance of equi-pment and generally low productivity in the port.
My recent visit to the port was to check whether the commitments made in res-ponse to these concerns had been implemented.There has indeed been great progress over the past year in turning around the per-formance of the port, despite the impact of COVID-19.These efforts are already showing results in improved maintenance of equipment, reduced congestion, quicker turnaround times and incre-ased use of rail instead of road transport.
While this is important pro-gress, there is still much work to be done to position Durban as a world-class port and as a hub port for the Southern Hemisphere.
In recent years, the port has slipped from its position as first in Africa to third, behind Tangier in Morocco and Port Said in Egypt.
Truck turnaround times have greatly improved.
Similarly, the reliability of cargo handling equipment has improved to 80% and is heading towards at least 95% to meet international bench-marks.
Ship waiting times have reduced to impressive levels.These statistics may seem technical and obscure, but they have a direct impact on the growth of our economy and on the prices we pay as consumers.
We have made improving the efficiency of our ports a priority of Operation Vul-indlela and have focused on rebuilding Transnet, which is one of our valued state-owned enterprises.The new management of Transnet and its operating di-visions are resolutely focused on turning the performance of the port around.The management has ambi-tious and exciting expansion plans for all five of the port’s precincts.
These include the deepening of the Maydon Wharf channel to allow larger, modern ves-sels to enter the port, the infill of Pier 1 and Pier 2 to create additional capacity for con tainers and the development of a new container terminal in the Point Precinct.
Altogether, the expansion of infrastructure at the port will require R100 billion in new investment over the next decade and more.
This will completely transform the port, expanding its capacity for container handling from 2.9 million units to more than 11 million units.These ambitious plans will require greater private sector participation and investment.
Transnet, including the Durban Port, is an important national asset belonging to the people of South Africa.
Partnerships with the private sector are crucial to bring new investment, technology and expertise to port operations and to modernise equipment and infrastructure.
Transnet is planning, for example, to advertise a concession later this year to build and operate the new Point Terminal.
This will bring in private investment and improve the efficiency of container handling.
Through our reform process we are steadily improving the efficiency of our ports and railways and unlocking massive investment in infrastructure.
This will not only lower costs and improve the competitiveness of our exports, but will create thousands of new jobs in the process.Through both operational improvements and structural reforms, Durban Port will reclaim its place as the best-performing port in Africa.
As part of our Reconstruction and Recove ry Plan, we will continue to work tireles-sly to expand infrastructure investment and transform our network industries.
If my visit to Durban left one thing in my mind, it is that we South Africans are capable of succeeding in projects of vast importance and scale.
Our ambitions should match the size of our challenges.
With the progress we are making at the Durban Port, with the reinvigorated skills and capabilities that we have in Transnet, we now have the wind in our sails.
And we are moving at a rate of knots towards our destination.
Thanking our nurses
Allison Cooper
The country’s nurses, along with other medical staff, have put their lives on the line to help others during the Coronavirus Disease (COV ID-19) pandemic.
International Nurses Day, which is on 12 May, is an op-portunity to celebrate nurses for their service to others.Professional nurse Luyanda Ganuganu (25), from Groote Schuur Hospital in the West-ern Cape, says the day is also an opportunity for nurses to continue to shine the bright light of their profession.“It’s an opportunity for nurses to be recognised, but we must continue to provide quality care, especially dur-ing the pandemic,” he says.Ganuganu was on the frontline during the pandemic’s first and second wave, working at the hospital’s high care COVID-19 ward.
“The best part was the experience gained while working with patients, but the worst part was all the deaths that took place in the ward.
Emotionally, that was not easy.”Ganuganu, who has been a professional nurse for the past two years, chose the profession because he loves helping people.
“I grew up in a rural area in the Eastern Cape and could see how people struggled due to a lack of clinics with nursing care.
This developed my passion for wanting to make a difference,” he says.During the pandemic, Ganuganu has had to learn to work under pressure.
“Decisions have to be made quickly and you have to think on your feet.
I also learnt how to communicate with patients,” he adds.Ganuganu found it very difficult to go to work during the second wave.
While he wanted to help others, he also feared for his own family.
“I got married in December 2020 and my wife is pregnant.
I have seen a lot of pregnant women die in the COVID-19 ward.
I had to be even more careful because I did not want to put my wife’s life in danger,” he says.Ganuganu is grateful to his managers and colleagues.
“I want to thank them for their support and for giving me the opportunity to grow as a nurse.
It’s an awesome experience to work with colleagues who support younger staff.”His message to the community is to help nurses by being responsible.
“Help us to help you.
Every-one knows what is expected of them during COVID-19.
Please continue to follow all the guidelines and proto-cols,” says Ganuganu.Professional nurse Luyanda Ganuganu has been on the frontline of the fight against COVID-19 at Groote Schuur Hospital.
Help learners cope with COVID-19
vukuzenzele unnamed
PARENTS AND TEACHERS can help learners cope with the anxiety and depression they are experiencing because of the Coronavirus Disease pandemic.
More Matshediso Learners have been faced with many challenges as a result of the Coronavirus Disease (COVID-19) and the lockdown restrictions.
There has been constant change in the learning envi-ronment at South Africa’s schools, which can leave learners feeling anxious and fearful.Learners have had to navigate a new world of online or delayed learning, social isolation, loss, grief and trauma, all of which can cause increased anxiety and depression.Counselling psychologist Boitumelo Tlhapane, who works for the Inclusive Education Unit at the Free State Department of Edu-cation, says feeling anxious or depressed during these trying times is understan-dable.
“For about a-year-and-a-half now, learners have had to adjust to a new way of learning, with less contact and teaching time.
“Many have had to study independently, while living with uncertainty about their future and the impact of COVID-19 on their hopes and dreams, family and social life,” says Tlhapane.
How to cope She explains that anxiety is the fear of or worrying about something that has an uncertain outcome.
To help learners to cope, she offers the following advice: • Understand that it is nor-mal to be anxious or fear-ful.
This does not mean that you are weak.
It is okay to not be okay.
• What you do with your fear is what is important.
Are you obeying all the COVID-19 rules that have put in place to protect you and others?
What else can you do to ensure your and others’ safety?
• Do you have reliable infor-mation about COVID-19 in case you or a loved one gets infected?
• Do you have the support of teachers, family and friends to help you when you feel uncertain or stressed or anxious?
This is very important.
Teachers can also provide non-contact support and learning through online material and study groups; by setting up reminders to motivate learners to study at home; and by encoura-ging them to communicate their fears about schooling.
“This is important, espe-cially for subjects that learners find challenging,” she adds.Family and friends can provide learners with emotional support, in the form of encouragement and constant reassurance, says Tlhapane.
“Learners need to be constantly reminded that their efforts and dedication are recognised and appre-ciated, thus increasing their confidence.”How to reduce anxietyTlhapane says there are various ways that parents and learners can reduce anxiety.
These include:
• Ensure that there is a strict routine for studying, sleep-ing and socialising.
This will help learners meet their goals and deadlines, while helping them to feel in control of their studies.
• Learners must use all of the available resources provided at school and on educational programmes, in line with the curricu-lum, that are broadcast on television and radio.• Parents can assist by en-suring that learners are not overexposed to COVID-19 news, especially around death and conspiracy the-ories, as this may fuel their fears and lead to more psy-chological conditions.
• Learners should limit so-cial media consumption, as it wastes study time and is a major distraction.
• The family can adapt their lifestyle by adding self-care tasks, such as physical exercise and play.
“If a learner loses a loved one, they may experience grief symptoms that resem-ble depression or anxiety.
“It is important that the school and the parents refer these learners for psycho-social support, which is provided by the Depart-ment of Basic Education, or consult free resources or local clinics for a referral,” says Tlhapane.Signs of distress Parents should be alert and watch for various signs that may indicate that their child is in distress.
These include:
• The child being withdrawn and isolating from others.• Irregular eating and sleep patterns.
• Being overly emotional, such as constantly crying, irritable moods or losing their temper quickly.• Struggling to concentrate.• Not completing tasks and homework.• Behavioural problems, such as aggressiveness.• Making up excuses not to go to school.
• Constantly on the phone or social media networks.• Fails to complete other tasks of daily living.
For assistance, parents and learners can visit the department’s district offices.
You can also contact the South African Depression and Anxiety Group, at 0800 567 567 or send an SMS to 31393 and a counsellor will call you back.
Inclusive communities critical to SA’s success
vukuzenzele unnamed
While the violence and destruction that engulfed parts of KwaZulu-Natal and Gauteng recently caused much damage to property and livelihoods, it also had a huge impact on the cohesion of our communities.
This was most evident in the tragic events that took place in and around Phoe-nix in eThekwini.
During some of the worst unrest in our democracy, and in a climate already thick with suspicion and paranoia, people that had lived side-by-side in relative peace turned on each other.There is still much we have to unearth about the events that took place.
The proliferation of fake news, doctored images and incor-rect information has made it difficult to separate fact from fiction.
But we do know from official reports and personal accounts that people were racially profiled at illegal roadblocks, some people were pulled out of cars and beaten, and some were humiliated and degraded.
Several people were killed.Much of what has hap-pened is the inevitable outcome when people take the law into their own hands.
Vigilantism will not be tolerated in this coun-try.
It is criminal and it is dangerous.Now that calm has been restored to the affected areas, our law enforcement agencies are investigating all acts of criminality.
A team of detectives has been assigned to deal with the murders and are working closely with local communities.
There have been arrests and those responsible will face the full might of the law.
Much of the narrative around the events in Phoenix has been domina-ted by attempts to turn one race against another.
It has been stoked by anonymous people on social media and in messaging groups making outrageous claims and calling for revenge.There is an attempt to present this as a sign of imploding race relations between African and Indian communities.Just as there were people who tried to exploit people’s vulnerability and cause mayhem, there are those who want to present criminal acts in racial terms to serve their own purposes.They will not succeed.
South Africa has a proud history of principled non-racialism and working class solidarity.
African and Indian communities were united in the strug-gle against apartheid and, together with other com-munities, remain committed to a united and democratic society.In response to the fear and mistrust, the people of Phoenix and the neigh-bouring areas of Bhambayi, Zwelitsha and Amaoti are working to repair the damage.
Aided by a peace forum established by the South African Police Service in partnership with community leaders, the communities have come together to support those affected by the unrest and to open channels of dialogue.This is not the only part of the country that is confronted with such challenges.Our efforts to build integrated communities are frustrated by the legacy of apartheid planning and persistent inequality.
Our cities, towns and rural areas are still all divided by both race and class.
This discourages cooperation and understanding, and hampers the work we have undertaken to build a non-racial society.Correcting these spatial distortions must be part of our work of building an inclusive economy and improving the living conditions of all South Africans.
It is why we are working to build flourishing township and rural economies, and focusing on the growth of small businesses.
It is why we are investing in infrastructure in these areas and working to improve the provision of services.At the same time, we need to confront racism in our society.
We need to have honest conversations not only about our attitudes to one another, but also about the material conditions that divide us.
For as long as the division of wealth and opportunity in South Africa is largely still determined by race and gender, we will not be able to build a truly united nation.The events in Phoenix are a painful reminder of how much work we still need to do to build inclusive communities that have suc-cessfully broken down the boundaries of the past.
These events also demon-strate how determined some people are to divide us, and how we need to do every-thing we can to resist them.It is our collective respon-sibility to support these communities in eThekwini and elsewhere in their jour-ney towards reconciliation and healing.Our democracy was built by peacemakers and bridge-builders.
The architects of our freedom were African, Indian, coloured and white men and women of great courage who chose the path of reconciliation over retribution, and of peace over war.
As we strive to heal from this collective national trauma, let us stand as one.
Let us overcome our differences in pursuit of the common good.
Let us work together to forge a common future in which everyone has an equal share.
A million work and livelihood opportunities, and counting
vukuzenzele unnamed
Less than two years ago, we launched the Presidential Employ-ment Stimulus to create jobs and support livelihoods as part of supporting the economic recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic.The Presidential Employ-ment Stimulus has just reached the milestone of one million participants since its inception.This achievement is the result of a collaborative effort across government and the wider society, including the private sector, community-based organisa-tions and many others.The programme is con-tributing to employment creation while the economy takes time to recover and create jobs at the scale we need.As we pursue economic growth to deliver decent and sustainable employ-ment at a much larger scale, we will continue to build on the success of the Presiden-tial Employment Stimulus and expand its reach.
It is still very much needed to complement recovery of the job market.
It also sup-ports economic recovery in important ways.In a context where a lack of work experience is a major barrier to finding work, these programmes are providing high-quality work experiences.In the largest programme supported by the stimulus, for example, nearly 600 000 young people have been placed as school assistants in over 22 000 schools in every corner of the coun-try.
School management, teachers and other stake-holders all agree that the contribution of the school assistants has improved the learning environment in schools.Many self-employed people found their live-lihoods disrupted by the pandemic.
The creative sector was particularly badly affected.
In this sector, support was provided to people to create jobs for themselves and others.
The movies, music and plays produced are now able to generate further income from the sale of rights, tickets and royalties.
All of this has been contributing to the growth of the sector.The Presidential Employ-ment Stimulus has also supported sustainable livelihoods.
Over 140 000 subsistence farmers have received production input vouchers to assist them to resume and expand produc-tion after the disruptions of COVID-19.One such beneficiary is 36-year-old Phindile Ngcoya from Richmond in KwaZulu-Natal.
She is one of ten members of a family farming cooperative and says the voucher she received helped the new cooperative survive and become profitable.The Presidential Employ-ment Stimulus is also supporting graduates, with opportunities provided to nurses, science graduates, artisans and others.
Twenty six universities are helping to place unemployed gra-duates in work relevant to their qualifications.The Department of Science and Innovation has intro-duced a range of innovative citizen science programmes, such as the Duzi uMngeni Conservation Trust, which employs local youth as Enviro-Champs to empower communities to rehabilitate local water sources.
Another programme by the depart-ment helps entrepreneurs to develop business proposals in the green economy.Public employment pro-grammes also have a direct positive impact on commu-nities because they create work for the common good.
In the case of the Presiden-tial Employment Stimulus, this includes improving learning in schools, upgra-ding informal settlements, supporting survivors of gender-based violence, environmental conservation and innovating in waste-recycling.The Presidential Employ-ment Stimulus was launched in response to the unemployment crisis that was deepened by the COVID-19 pandemic.
Alt-hough the pandemic may have abated, unemployment has not.The incomes earned in Presidential Employment Stimulus programmes have been an economic boost to small enterprises and informal businesses in local economies across the country.
School assistants employed in Umgungund-lovu are spending their wages in Umgungundlovu.
The same in Putsonderwa-ter.Instead of the ‘trickle down’ effect, money is being put directly into the hands of communities that need it most.
That money then circulates locally and ‘trickles up’ into the wider economy.That is why we call it a stimulus, because the entire economy benefits along with society.Through the Presidential Employment Stimulus, we have unlocked energy, commitment, creativity, innovation and opportunities.
In the process, we are building a society that works.Over one million people have benefited directly.
Many more people, in the families and communities of participants, have felt the impact of the Stimulus.Our task now is to expand and deepen the impact of this work.As a result of the Presidential Employment Stimulus, we now have hundreds of thousands of people with valuable work experience.
Most of these people are easy to find through the SAYouth.mobi platform.We call on business to hire these young people with newly-acquired work experience as they leave these programmes.Once employers see the Presidential Youth Stimulus as a place to find young talent, then we will be able to realise the full potential of this innovative and hugely successful initiative.
NSFAS 2023 applications open
vukuzenzele unnamed
The National Stu dent Financial Aid Scheme (NSFAS) 2023 application cycle has opened.Higher Education, Science and Innovation Minister Dr Blade Nzimande made the announcement recently during a media briefing.Minister Nzimande says the scheme resolved to open the application cycle early, as opposed to the previous year, in order to give prospective applicants enough time to submit their applications and supporting documents.Giving an update report on NSFAS funding for the 2022 academic year, Minister Nzimande says a budget of R43 billion was allocated to the scheme towards the beneficiaries’ tuition fees, including food and travelling allowance, and study material.He says 985 672 applications were received with 140 636 application unsuccessful.Of the applications received, 739 526 applications were provisionally approved for funding pending registration from respective institutions.“[The] majority of unsuccessful applicants failed to provide sufficient evidence to support their applications for funding; exceeded the financial eligibility threshold; already achieved the highest level of qualification that NSFAS funds and being non-compliant to the academic pathways of the TVET college sector,” Minister Nzimande explains.
According to information on the NSFAS website, as of the 2021 academic year, NSFAS no longer provides funding for postgraduate courses.
This includes postgraduate certificates, postgraduate diplomas, honours degrees, masters and PhD degrees.This means the highest qualification that the scheme funds is a Bachelor’s Degree.Improving the application systemIn a bid to improve its appli cation system and process to simplify it for prospective applicants, Minister Nzimande says this year, NSFAS has implemented a number of enhancements to the system to ensure a seamless application experience.He says the NSFAS online application portal was re-designed to be more user friendly and closer to other platforms that prospective applicants are accustomed to such as WhatsApp, Twitter, Facebook and Instagram.“The application process itself has been simplified and the questions asked are easier to understand by the public.
Additionally, applicants can pause the process and continue at a later stage without restarting from scratch, something that was not possible in previous cycles, he says.“Over and above the enhancements, NSFAS developed additional chan-nels of application to cater for applicants from diverse backgrounds, also keeping in mind that most of the prospective applicants are young people who embrace the digital way of doing things,” Minister Nzimande adds.The new channels include a mobile App, USSD and WhatsApp where one can apply for NSFAS funding, track application status and cancel applications, amongst other things.
This was previously done via the web portal.Furthermore, to ensure that no applicant is left behind, Minister Nzimande says NSFAS will embark on an outreach campaign to ensure that individuals who do not have access to technological devices that enable them to apply online are given the necessary resources and support to apply.
How to access NSFAS bursaryYou qualify for a NSFAS bursary if you are a South African citizen who plans to study in 2023 or you are already studying at a public university or TVET college and you meet the following requirements:
• You are a SASSA grant recipient.• Your combined household income is not more than R350 000 per year.• If you are a person living with a disability, your combined household income should not be more than R600 000 per year.• If you are a student who began university studies before 2018 and your household income is not more than R122 000 per year.The application period will close on 31 January 2023.
Victim empowerment programme restores hope
Owen Mngadi
The Thohoyandou Victim Empowerment Programme (TVEP) strives to restore hope and con-fidence in the justice system through its intensive initiatives aimed at assisting survivors of gender-based violence (GBV) and rape by providing them with psychosocial services.
Founded in Limpopo over 20 years ago, the TVEP operates in Tshilidzini and Donald Fraser hospitals under the Thulamela Local Municipality.
Its Acting Director Fhatuwani Manthada says the programme aims to instil a zero-tolerance attitude towards sexual assault, GBV and child abuse among Thohoyandou resi-dents, given the fact that these cases are prevalent in the area.
He says in the past, crime statistics indicated that there were many rape cases in Tho-hoyandou, but the TVEP has made great strides in raising awareness and providing trauma counselling services to curb the scourge.
As the world will be obser-ving the 16 Days of Activism for No Violence Against Women and Children from 25 November to 10 December, Manthada says the programme is satisfied with the progress made with encouraging residents to understand their rights and report crimes.
“The TVEP receives between 80 and 100 victims of domestic violence every month, while 45 to 50 rape cases are reported monthly,” says Manthada.The programme’s one-stop centres offer a wide range of services to victims, including access to legal assistance, protection of victims against perpetrators, court case monitoring, counselling and empowerment through skills development, thus giving the victims a fresh start.
Manthada states that the TVEP works closely with the South African Police Service,
Department of Health and Department of Social Development to prevent secondary traumatisation of victims in the process of opening a case.
“In rape cases, healthcare workers and the police come to the TVEP centres to assist victims to open criminal cases against the perpetrators and also provide counselling services,” he says.
The TVEP accommodates victims for up to 14 days, however, the arrangement could be extended in cases that involve the whole family or children.“We have empowerment unity that conducts public dialogues and educates people about their rights.
We serve more than one million residents from Thohoyandou and surrounding areas.
We have managed to restore hope and people now have trust in the criminal justice [system] through our relationship with the police,” he says.
The TVEP has also created employment for 44 people who serve in various departments such as finance, human resources and evaluation.Despite receiving continuous funding of R90 000 quarterly from the Limpopo Department of Social Development, the TVEP was affected by COVID-19 as many funders pulled out, thus negatively affecting the organisation’s operational processes.However, the Gender-Based Violence and Femicide (GBVF) Response Fund, which was launched by President Cyril Ramaphosa, together with the International Women’s Forum of South Africa and social partners have assisted the programme.
The TVEP was among the first batch of the organisations, that fight against GBVF, to receive funding.
With the sum of R128 million that was raised through contributions by the private sector, multi-sectoral fund, the GBVF Fund will assist and support the implementation of the National Strategic Plan on GBVF.
The TVEP has been allocated R250 000 for the current year and will receive more funding for 2023.Manthada says the funds have enabled the TVEP to reach out to more victims and keep the organisation running.
Murendeni Vhengani (26) is a survivor who was rescued by the TVEP from her abusive ex-boyfriend.
She spent 46 months months at the centre, with her four-year-old daughter.
The centre assisted her to open charges against him and to file a protection order.
He is still on trial.“They welcomed me with warm hands after many years of suffering.
I felt safe.
I have regained my confidence,” she says.
The GBVF Fund chairperson, Dr Judy Dlamini, says funding for 108 organisations whose applications have been successful are being processed.Information regarding the next round of applications will soon be available on the GBVF Fund website: https://gbvf.org.za/.
New approach to fight corruption gets results
vukuzenzele unnamed
The fight against corruption requires both firm political will and independent, capable crime-fighting institutions.In my first State of the Nation Address, in 2018, I made a commitment to turn the tide against corruption in our public institutions and fight fraud and collusion in the private sector with the same intensity and purpose.Since then, we have been working hard to strengthen and support our law enforcement and related agencies.
We set up the Investigating Directorate in the National Prosecuting Authority to deal with serious corruption and the Special Tribunal to enable the Special Investigating Unit (SIU) to more easily recover stolen funds.
We have also provided support and resources to other critical crime-fighting bodies like the Asset Forfeiture Unit, Specialised Commercial Crimes Unit and Directorate for Priority Crime Investigation, known as the Hawks.These efforts are producing results.Through collaboration with key entities in the criminal justice system, the Investigating Directorate has enrolled over 20 corruption cases in the last financial year and 65 accused have been charged.
These include several ‘state capture’ and other serious corruption cases.In the past financial year, the Asset Forfeiture Unit obtained freezing orders to the value of R5.4 billion relating to corruption offences, with R70 million paid into the Criminal Assets Recovery Fund.Over the past eight years, the SIU has recovered funds and assets to the value of R2.6 billion and set aside contracts to the value of R18 billion.
A total of 119 cases worth more than R13 billion have been enrolled by the SIU at the Special Tribunal.Corruption is an extremely complex crime to prosecute.Perpetrators go to extraordinary lengths to cover their tracks.
They set up shelf companies to hide dodgy transactions, rapidly moving monies between multiple accounts, misrepresenting income to the tax authorities, and, in the case of government employees, using friends and relatives to apply for tenders to mask their involvement.This means that the response of the authorities has to be just as sophisticated.In 2020, we established a multidisciplinary Fusion Centre as an operational hub to address priority financial crimes, including corruption.
The centre brings together the investigative capabilities of government’s crime prevention and security structures and those of the Financial Intelligence Centre, which develops intelligence for law enfor-cement agencies to use in their investigations.Two years since the Fusion Centre was established, its multidisciplinary approach to ‘follow the money’ has yielded significant results.In the last financial year, the work of the Fusion Centre supported 276 fraud and corruption investigations.
Approximately R659 million was restored to the State through preservation and recovery of the proceeds of crime.
Approximately R613 million in suspected criminal proceeds were frozen.The Fusion Centre was initially set up to investigate corruption around COVID-related procurement.
Its mandate is now being expanded to include money-laundering, fraud, maladministration, terrorist financing and other serious financial crimes.The Hawks recently outlined some of the progress that has been made by the Anti-Corruption Task Team, of which the Fusion Centre forms part.
Between the 2019 and 2022 financial years, 554 suspects were arrested for corruption, of which 142 were convicted.Another vital financial intelligence tool is the lifestyle audits conducted by the South African Revenue Service (SARS).
Last year, SARS completed 25 lifestyle audits to the value of over R450 million to resolve discrepancies between declared income and an individual’s lifestyle.It is clear that the measures we have taken as this administration to restore the capacity, capability and credibility of the institutions involved in the fight against corruption are having a demonstrable impact.The synchronised work of all the law enforcement agencies is hitting criminals where it hurts most: in their pockets.
Public funds that were looted and diverted are being recovered and those responsible for these acts are being prosecuted by our courts.To further strengthen our efforts to turn the tide against corruption, I am announcing appointments to the National Anti-Corruption Advisory Council.The Council will bring together stakeholders from across society to oversee the implementation of government’s anti-corruption strategy.
The new body will advise government on the critical preventative measures, institutional capabilities and resources needed to prevent a recurrence of state capture and to stamp out fraud and corruption in South Africa.Our ultimate aim is to build strong and resilient institutions that can end corruption and withstand any future attempts at state capture.As we continue to build on these successes, we are confident that even if it takes time, those who stole and looted resources meant for the people will face the consequences of their actions.
Look out for early signs of childhood cancer
More Matshediso
A lack of awareness of childhood cancer and its symptoms means that many South African children are diag-nosed when the disease is at an advanced stage.
The earlier cancer is diagnosed and treated, the higher the chance of a full recovery.
Childhood Cancer Foun-dation South Africa (CHOC) Communication Coordina-tor Taryn Seegers says by knowing the common signs of cancer in young people, you could help save a life.“The signs and symptoms can be difficult to spot amid the normal bumps, bruises, growth spurts and mood swings.
However, early detection is key,” she says.According to the Cancer Association of South Africa (CANSA), between 800 to 1 000 South African children are diagnosed with cancer each year.However, the association estimates that half of the children with cancer in South Africa are never diagnosed.
To help ensure cancer is spotted as soon as possible, CHOC runs awareness pro-grammes in communities, telling parents and children about the early warning signs they must look out for.
The foundation supports children and teenagers with cancer or life-threatening blood disorders and their families.“We aim to improve early detection and facilitate effective treatment.
At any one time, CHOC can have over 1 500 children and teenagers in its care, while offering psycho-social sup-port to over 1 500 families,” says Seegers.
In the past financial year, Seegers says CHOC was able to serve 1 724 children, 553 teenagers and 2 232 adults through its core programmes.
“Our services include emotional support through their cancer journey, com-fort, end-of-life care and bereavement support,” says Seegers.
St Siluan’s signs of childhood cancer• S – Seek medical help early for ongoing symptoms.• I – White spot in the eye, new squint, sudden blindness or bulging eyeball.
• L – Lump on the stomach, pelvis, head, arms, legs, testicle or glands.
• U – Unexplained fever present for over two weeks, weight loss, fatigue, pale appearance, easy bruising and bleeding.
• A – Aching bones, joints, back and easy fractures.
• N – Neurological signs, a change in walking, balance or speech, continuous headaches with/without vomiting and an enlarged head.
“Teenagers, busy with sports and activities, often do not notice the first symptoms of their cancer,” says Seegers.
How to prevent teenage pregnancy
vukuzenzele unnamed
There are various ways to prevent teenage pregnancy, including choosing not to have sex until you are married or ready to have children.
Some people think that abstinence (choosing to not have sex until you are mar-ried) is old-fashioned, while others think it is morally the best thing to do.
Teenagers, however, need to decide for themselves.Many people do not want to wait until they are mar-ried before having sex.
They also do not want to rush into anything and make costly mistakes.
They often decide that delaying having sex until they are older, more responsible, in a stable re-lationship with one partner and have a job, is the best thing to do.If you choose abstinence or delaying sex, there are other things you can do to protect yourself:
• Choose your friends care fully.
Friends should want what is best for you and should respect your decision not to have sex.• Beware of situations that could be unsafe, like friends drinking or taking drugs, that could lead to unsafe sex.• Beware of partners who claim that you will sleep with them if you love them.• Listen to and learn from those who have gone through teenage pregnancy.
They know the mistakes and disadvantages.• Listen to and learn from your parents about their life experiences.
If you decide that absti-nence and delaying sex are not the best decisions for you and you would rather not wait, take the time to learn about protection, including contraception, which is using a method (mechanical or chemical) to prevent pregnancy.
There are various con-traceptives that work in different ways, but they are all designed to prevent pregnancy.
They include oral contraception, known as ‘the pill’; injectable con-traception; and male and female condoms.
What can I do if I’m pregnant?If you think you might be pregnant, take someone you trust with you to your nearest clinic to have a preg-nancy test.Antenatal care (taking care of the unborn baby) is important and usually starts at eight weeks.
Your local clinic can help you with antenatal care and a healthcare worker will as-sist you to develop a plan that is suitable for you and your baby.If you are pregnant, it is important to eat healthy nutritious food, exercise, get enough sleep and avoid drugs and alcohol.
*This information was supplied by the KwaZulu-Natal Department of Health.
FALLING PREGNANT when you are a teenager will affect the rest of your life, but there are ways to keep yourself safe from an unplanned pregnancy.
Transforming the agricultural sector
vukuzenzele unnamed
Recently, the Department of Agriculture, Land Reform and Rural Development (DALRRD) announced that members of the public will be able to apply to lease 700 000 hectares of underutilised or vacant state land in seven of the provinces.
Agricultural land is the mainstay of our natural resource base.
The availability and sustainable use of farmland to grow crops and for animal husbandry is key to our very survival.South Africa has vast tracts of land suitable for agricultural production, with 37,9% of our total land area currently being used for commercial agriculture.Like many other countries, our arable land is under threat from land degradation, water scarcity and urban encroachment.
We are also losing prime agricultural land through land-use changes.Given our history, broadening access to agricultural land for commercial production and subsistence farming is a national priority.Although the post-1994 land reform process has resulted in more land being restored and restituted to black South Africans, the pernicious effects of the 1913 Natives Land Act continue to be in patterns of farmland ownership.The Act went far beyond dispossessing millions of people of their ancestral land.With land ownership still concentrated in the hands of the few, and agriculture primary production and value chains mainly owned by white commercial farmers, the effects of our past remain with us today.
The continued monopolization of a key means of production like land is not just an obstacle to advancing a more egalitarian society; it is also a recipe for social unrest.
The hunger for land to farm is growing, especially amongst the rural poor.
And for a number of reasons, the pace of land reform in this particular sector has been slow and unsatisfactory.
Transforming patterns of agricultural land ownership is vital not just to address the historical injustices of the past, but to safeguard our nation’s food security.
As noted in the 2019 report of the Presidential Advisory Panel on Land Reform and Agriculture, “whilst we export food, back home 41% of people in rural areas and 59,4% in urban areas have severely inadequate access to food.” Agrarian reform has been a priority of successive administrations since democracy.
Between 1994 and March 2018 the State has delivered 8,4 million hectares of land to previously disadvantaged individuals under the land reform programme.
But this progress amounts to less than 10% of all commercial farmland.
In my State of the Nation Address earlier this year I committed that state-owned agricultural land would soon be released for farming.
This is a major milestone in the agrarian reform process, and gives effect to the promise of the Freedom Charter that the land shall be shared among those who work it.Our redistributive vision aims to strike a balance between social justice and redress, and enhancing agricultural output by bringing more black farmers into the mainstream of the economy.Land is a productive asset that generates profit and can be used for collateral to secure other assets.We have to ensure that land acquired for farming purposes is productively used.
To safeguard the allocated state land for farming purposes, the lease is not transferrable.
Beneficiaries will sign a lease agreement with the State and pay a rental fee consistent with the land value.We must also ensure that farmers are supported along the road to sustainability and profitability.As part of this programme, beneficiaries will be trained in financial management and enterprise development.
Experience has shown that emerging and small-scale farmers often lack the financial skills to exploit market opportunities and integrate with value chains.We are prioritizing women, youth and persons with disabilities as beneficiaries.There has been demonstrable success with empowering women farmers under the existing Proactive Land Acquisition Strategy.
In a number of provinces, women who have been allocated farms by the DALRRD have been able to run them successfully and even move into commercial production.In addition to the land acquisition itself, the department continues to invest in infrastructure, equipment and machinery to enable these entrepreneurs to run successful businesses.Broadening access to land and opportunities for farming will support job creation and enterprise development, and improve the market for food, agricultural goods and services.The ultimate goal of releasing these land parcels is to transform the agricultural landscape by growing a new generation of farmers.
Leasing land under such favourable conditions must spur them to think big; to not just grow their own businesses but to advance shared wealth and prosperity in the communities in which they farm.They must heal the deep divisions of our past.
They must dispel the stereotype that only white farmers are commercially successful in South Africa, and that black farmers are perpetually ‘emerging.’In working this land; in turning it to productive use, they will indeed turn swords into ploughshares.
They will become the faces of national reconciliation.
Special Tribunal is showing that crime does not pay
Vukuzenzele Unnamed
During the recent Presidential Imbizo in Mahikeng, several citizens raised concerns about the pace of the fight against corruption.
They told me what I have heard in many other communities across the country: that the perpetrators of such acts are known, not least because they flaunt the proceeds of their crimes.
But the arm of the law is long.
Those who have stolen from the state may believe they have gotten away with it.
But their deeds will eventually catch up with them, whoever they are, and whatever position they may hold.
They will learn that crime does not pay.
In this regard, one of our most effective weapons in the fight against corruption and state capture is the Special Tribunal of the Special Investigating Unit (SIU), which I established in 2019.
It adjudicates on matters that the SIU institutes for civil litigation after it has concluded its investigations.
The Special Tribunal was set up to speed up litigation.
This approach has made it possible for public funds and state assets lost to corrupt acts to be recovered faster, avoiding delays in the high courts, where the SIU has to wait its turn together with other litigants.
The SIU can request preservation orders and the freezing of assets to prevent further losses to the State.
This is important when considering that per petrators who are under suspicion often go to great lengths to move around, hide or dispose of proceeds of corruption.
There can be no doubt the Special Tribunal has been a game changer.
Since its establishment, the Tribunal has recovered around R8.6 billion from unlawful contracts.
For any fight against corruption to be deemed effective, it is not sufficient that perpetrators are pro secuted.
The proceeds of their crimes must be recovered.
This money belongs to citizens and should be used to meet their needs.
The Special Tribunal recently ordered two construction companies to return the profits they earned from R40 million in contracts to erect the Beit Bridge border fence.
This followed an investigation by the SIU that uncovered a number of irregularities, including a pre-payment to the companies by the Department of Public Works and Infrastructure.
Over the past few weeks alone, the Tribunal has reviewed and set aside more than R100 million worth of irregular and unlawful contracts arising from COVID-related pro curement.
The Special Tribunal has also been successful in getting back money from senior executives in state-owned enterprises who conducted irregular business activities.
For example, last year a former Transnet executive was ordered to pay R26 million he received as a shareholder of a firm of consulting engineers contracted to Transnet while he was a full-time employee.
The SIU has in a number of cases approached the Tribunal to delay the payment of pension benefits, pending the outcome of its investigations, to public servants implicated in financial irregularities or fruitless and wasteful expenditure.
The cases before the Special Tribunal show that much work still needs to be done to strengthen governance and management across all arms of the state.
They point to serious lapses on the part of accounting officers and failures to adhere to laws and regulations governing procurement I have said before that winning the war on cor ruption will be difficult, and that it will take time to unravel the vast webs of patronage that had become entrenched.
I have also maintained that we must fight private sector corruption with equal vigour, because for every public sector employee willing to be bribed, there is a business person willing to pay a bribe.
These corrupt relationships have eroded the capacity of the state to deliver on its mandate.
They have set back the state’s efforts to provide decent healthcare, to deliver clean water, and to ensure a consistent supply of power to communities and businesses.
But, as the Special Tribunal has demonstrated, we are steadily turning the tide.
Not only are perpetrators being arrested and taken to court; they are also having to forfeit the proceeds of their crimes.
There is still a long way to go, and there is a huge amount of stolen public funds that still need to be recovered.
But the SIU and the Special Tribunal have made a good start, and I am confident of many more successes in the months and years ahead.
All you need to know about epilepsy
Vukuzenzele Unnamed
Most people with epilepsy can live a normal life if they take their medication and the condition is well controlled.
According to Dr Nhlakanipho Gumede, the Clinical Manager of Medical Services at Harry Gwala Regional Hospital in Pietermaritzburg, epilepsy is not a psychological disorder, disease or illness, and it is not contagious.
He explains that epilepsy is a neurological disorder marked by sudden recurrent episodes of sensory disturbance, loss of consciousness or convulsions, associated with abnormal electrical activity in the brain.
“The brain comprises of billions of nerve cells (neurons) communicating through electrical and chemical signals.
When there is a sudden excessive electrical discharge that disrupts the normal activity of the nerve cells, a seizure may result.
“A single seizure does not necessarily mean you have epilepsy.
A diagnosis by a medical practitioner needs to confirm this,” he says.
According to Epilepsy South Africa, 80% of people with epilepsy will be able to control their seizures with medication.
Causes and seizures
The cause of epilepsy in six out of 10 people is not known.
In the other 40%, it can be caused by a head injury, injury during the birthing process, alcohol and drug abuse, aging or a metabolic or biochemical disturbance or imbalance.
Dr Gumede says the signs and symptoms of epilepsy vary, and can present in various ways, including generalised absence seizures (petit mal), when a person looks blank and stares; generalised tonicclonic seizures (grand mal), which commonly start with body stiffening, before the person falls down and has jerking movements; and complex partial seizures, which affect a part of the brain.
A petit mal seizure only lasts a few seconds, and the person may be unaware that they had one.
During a grand mal seizure, the person may have a blue colour around their mouth, which fades when normal breathing resumes.
Grand mal seizures usually last a few minutes.
“Protect the person from injury by moving objects away and cushioning their head.
Don’t restrict their movement or put any thing in their mouth.
Help breathing by laying the person on their side when the seizure ends.
Stay with the person until they have fully recovered.”
During a complex partial seizure, the person may appear confused, distracted or drunk.
They may also have repetitive movements, such as plucking at their clothes.
“Remove harmful objects and guide the person away from danger.
Talk quietly and reassure them,” says Dr Gumede.
On the road to economic growth
vukuzenzele unnamed
The new Dumisani Makhaye Drive not only address-
es the challenge of apart- heid spatial planning but it also paves the way for economic development for communities in the area.
Speaking at the formal opening of the road Pres- ident Jacob Zuma said: “The road is of high qual- ity.
It demonstrates gov- ernment’s commitment to growing the economy and creating much-need-ed jobs in the community.” The R1.3 billion project is the biggest road infra- structure development in the country in five years and also the most complex road project to be under- taken in years.
It forms part of government’s na- tionwide programme to upgrade infrastructure.
The road spans the uMn- geni River and provides a strategic link between Duffs Road in KwaMashu and Dinkelman in New German y.
It shaves 16 kilometres for traffic using the N3 to connect to the N2.
“This is a major step in the government’s drive to create easy access for communities for socio-economic development.” This makes the com- munities of Newlands, KwaM as hu, Inand a, KwaDabeka, Clermont and Pinetown mor e closely connect ed.
It is set to ease traffic con- gestion in the eThekwini Metropolitan Municipal- ity.
Significantly, the road will serve as a new al- ternative route to the King Shaka International Airport for traffic coming from the Pietermaritzburg and Pinetown areas, which will ease
Israel, Palestine urged to emulate SA by pursuing peace
vukuzenzele unnamed
Our experience with the democratic transition is a lesson about the power of empathy, negotiation and compromise.
The escalating situation in Israel and Palestine affirms once more what we South Africans know too well, that intractable conflicts can only be solved through peaceful negotiation.
It also demonstrates that unless the root causes of a conflict are addressed, in this case the illegal occupation by Israel of Palestinian land and the denial of the Palestinian people’s right to self-determination, there will never be peace.The latest violence was sparked by an Israeli court decision to evict a group of families from their homes in the Sheikh Jarrah neighbourhood in East Jerusalem to make way for Israeli settlements.
The sight of men, women and children being evicted from the homes their families have lived in for generations brings back painful collective and personal memories for the majority of South Africans – of forced removals and land dispossession.
It was a pain and humiliation faced by my own family, and by many South African families.
My family was forcibly moved to different parts of the country on two occasions.
Being forced from one’s home at gunpoint is a trauma not easily forgotten and is carried across generations.
As a country, we are still living with the residual effects of the callous acts carried out in the name of apartheid spatial planning.For all who believe in equality, justice and human rights, we cannot but be moved and indeed angered, at the pain and humiliation being inflicted on the Palestinian people; for it echoes our own.
Israel’s actions are a violation of international law.
They show a total disregard for successive United Nations Security Council reso lutions that call for an end to the occupation of Palestinian land and for the fulfilment of the rights of the Palestinian people.
Since Israeli security forces launched assaults on worshippers at Al-Aqsa Mosque in Jerusalem, the violence has now engulfed the Gaza Strip, large parts of the West Bank and a number of Israeli cities.
It has claimed the lives of dozens of people, including children.
It is also deeply troubling that Israeli forces destroyed a multi-storey building that housed a number of media organisations, sending a chilling message to media reporting on the violence.The senseless and continued Israeli bombardment of Gaza will have devastating consequences for more than two million people who have been suffering under an illegal Israeli blockade for 14 years.
We call on all parties involved to show restraint, to respect human life and to cease the current hostilities.
As South Africa, we are committed to being part of international efforts aimed at reviving a political process that will lead to the establishment of a viable Palestinian state existing side-by-side in peace with Israel and within internationally recognised borders.
The two-state solution remains the most viable option for the peoples of Israel and Palestine and must continue to be supported.
Just as Israeli security forces were attacking worshippers at the Al-Aqsa Mosque, we in South Africa were preparing to commemorate the centenary of the Bulhoek Massacre at a religious site in Ntabelanga in the Eastern Cape.
On 24 May 1921, colonial security forces armed with machine guns and artillery opened fire on worshippers, killing more than 160 people and wounding nearly 130.
The massacre laid bare the brutality not only of the police force of the Union of South Africa, but also the racist system that it was charged to uphold.Just like the dispute in the Sheik Jarrah neighbourhood, the atrocity at Bulhoek was not just about a local dispute; it was fundamentally about the forced dispossession of land, about colonial occupa tion, about racial discrimi nation and about the violent suppression of dissent.As we reflect on the crisis in the Middle East and particularly on the suffering of the Palestinian people, we would do well to recall the words of Selby Msimang, a founding member of the African National Congress.In the aftermath of the Bulhoek massacre he wrote: “History has shown that the human soul naturally revolts against injustice”.
The protests and the revolt of the oppressed people of South Africa against colonialism and apartheid proved the veracity of this prophecy.
As lovers of freedom and of justice, we stand with the Palestinian people in their quest for self-determination, but also in their resistance against the deprivation of their human rights and the denial of their dignity.
As citizens of a country that was able to turn its back on race-hatred and bloodshed, and build an inclusive socie-ty rooted in human rights for all, it is our collective hope that the people of Israel and Palestine will follow a similar path; that they will find each other and that they will find peace.
Protect children from cyberbullying
Kgaogelo Letsebe
CSIR EXPERTS use technology to try and eliminate cyberbullying
The cruelty and devastating effects of cyberbul lying on children have been laid bare in recent months.
In a recent case of cyber-bullying, Grade 10 learner Lufuno Mavhunga, from Mbilwi Secondary School in Limpopo, died by suicide after being beaten by another learner.
Mavhunga over-dosed on prescription pills after the video of the beating was shared on social media.
Cyber security experts from the Council for Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR) say cyberbullying is ex-tremely harmful to children and can lead to depression, sadness, anger, frustration, anxiety and fear.“It can also lead to low self-esteem, delinquency, school violence, family prob-lems and suicidal thoughts,” explains CSIR senior re-searcher Sipho Ngobeni.
Cyberbullying occurs when someone uses electronic com-munication to intentionally harass, threaten, embarrass, intimidate, stalk, humiliate or make fun of another person.Ngobeni says research shows that 41% of children develop social anxiety after experiencing cyberbullying, 37% develop depression, 26% have suicidal thoughts and 25% engage in self-harm.“These findings show that cyberbullying is a serious issue... Getting everyone involved – youth, parents, educators, law enforcement and social media companies – is the key to dealing with this problem,” he adds.
Most cyberbullying, 42%, occurs on Instagram, 31% on Facebook, 31% on Snapchat, 12% on WhatsApp, 10% on YouTube and 9% on Twitter.CSIR expert Rofhiwa Net-shiya says there is a need for public education about all forms of cyberbullying.
“We need to educate chil-dren that cyberbullying can lead to serious consequenc-es,” she says.To tackle cyberbullying, the CSIR team is working on a platform that detects bullying in chatrooms.“The platform will automat-ically detect cyberbullying on chat groups and block users who continue to send hate speech.
It will give the user three warning messages and, if they persist, it will block them,” says Netshiya.
She advises parents to install basic internet mon-itoring software on their children's devices to monitor their activities.
“There are low-cost prod-ucts that can invisibly moni-tor the activities of your kids and privately email you the results as often as you like.
These are very important to track internet sites visit-ed, downloads, chatroom conversations and instant messaging.”The CSIR offers the follow-ing tips for parents who sus-pect their children are victims of cyberbullying:
• Ensure the child feels safe, show unconditional sup-port.• Work with your child to arrive at a course of action that you both agree on.• Discuss the cyberbullying matter with the relevant school.• Contact parents of the ag-gressor to investigate the matter and remove offend-ing material.• Report the issue to police in the case of physical threats or extortion, stalk-ing, blackmail and the sex-ual exploitation of minors.• Educate your child about appropriate online behav-iour.• Reinforce positive morals and values.
SONA 2022: Bettering lives and livelihoods
Vukuzenzele Unnamed
Government is committed to putting people first, and has given itself 100 days to finalise a plan to involve all sectors of society in growing South Africa’s economy, creating jobs and combating hunger.
This was emphasised by President Cyril Ramaphosa in his 2022 State of the Nation Address.
“This work will build on the foundation of the Economic Reconstruction and Recovery Plan, which remains our common programme to rebuild the economy,” he said.
The President said government’s priorities are overcoming the Coronavirus Disease (COVID-19) pandemic, building infrastructure, increasing local production, creating jobs and addressing the energy crisis.
“If there is one thing we all agree on, it is that the present situation – of deep poverty, unemployment and inequality – is unacceptable and unsustainable.”
Creating jobs
Last year, the unemployment rate reached its highest recorded level of 34.9% in the third quarter, following the financial devastation caused by COVID-19.
“We all know that government does not create jobs.
Business creates jobs.
The key task of government is to create the conditions that will enable the private sector – both big and small – to emerge, to grow, to access new markets, to create new products, and to hire more employees,” he said.Around 80% of employed people work in the private sector.
The President said government will introduce a new loan guarantee scheme to help small businesses recover.
The Presidential Employment Stimulus Programme, which has already supported over 850 000 employment opportunities, will be stepped up.
Most of the beneficiaries were young people; over 60% were women.
The employment stimulus will enable the Department of Home Affairs to recruit 10 000 unemployed youth for the digitisation of paper records, and the Social Employment Fund will create another 50 000 work opportunities.
The Department of Higher Education and Training will place 10 000 unemployed technical and vocational education and training graduates in workplaces from April 2022.
The SAYouth.mobi platform, which helps young work seekers to access opportunities and support, now has over 2.3 million youth registered.
Of these, over 600 000 have been placed into employment opportunities.
“A revitalised National Youth Service will recruit its first cohort of 50 000 young people during the next year [2023], creating opportunities for young people to contribute to their communities, develop their skills and grow their employability.”
SRD Grant continuesThe COVID-19 Social Relief of Distress (SRD) Grant, which has helped over 10 million unemployed people, has been extended for another year – to the end of March 2023.
In addition, government and its partners will look at ways to continue to support people in financial distress in a manner that is affordable to the country over the long term.
Access to land
Government is moving ahead with land reform and anticipates the approval of the Expropriation Bill this year.
The establishment of the Agriculture and Land Reform Development Agency will also be finalised this year.
“The Department of Public Works and Infrastructure will finalise the transfer of 14 000 hectares of state land to the Housing Development Agency,” the President said.
He added that there is enough arable land to support millions of thriving small-scale farmers in poultry, livestock, fruit and vegetables.
Already, over 100 000 farmers have received input vouchers to expand their production and the programme will be expanded to reach more farmers.
Corruption and crime
From instituting the Commission of Inquiry into State Capture, to investigating COVID-19-related procurement contracts, President Ramaphosa is leaving no stone unturned when it comes to ending corruption.
“None of our efforts to revive our economy will succeed if we do not tackle the scourge of corruption once and for all,” the President said.
By no later than 30 June 2022, he will present a plan of action in response to the Commission’s recommendations.
He explained that various government agencies were working together to identify wrongdoers, punish them, and to get looted State money refunded.
Safety and security will be strengthened through the recruitment of 12 000 police personnel and the reestablishment of community policing forums.
Fighting GBVF
Government will also continue to intensify the fight against Gender-Based Violence and Femicide (GBVF) this year, through the implementation of the National Strategic Plan on GBVF.
Three new laws are already working to strengthen the criminal justice system and support survivors.
“The implementation of this legislation will go a long way to ensuring that cases are successfully prosecuted, that survivors are protected and that there are more effective deterrents in place.” One of the new laws that President Ramaphosa was referring to is the Criminal and Related Matters Amendment Act which protects the vulnerable from secondary victimisation.
This Act allows the courts to appoint intermediaries through which a minor, a disabled person or an elderly person can be examined in proceedings.
The President was also referring to the new Criminal Law (Sexual Offences and Related Matters) Amendment Act which outlaws sexual exploitation and grooming of persons with mental disabilities.
This Act also states that sexual offences against persons who are mentally disabled must be recorded in the National Register of Sex Offenders.
The Domestic Violence Amendment Act takes account of some of the complexities in violent domestic relationships.
The Act allows for the process of obtaining protection orders, and broadened the circumstances under which a protection order can be applied for.
President Ramaphosa said this Act also protects the elderly from all forms of domestic violence, and also permits complainants to apply for protection orders online, saving them time and travel costs.
End of State of Disaster in sight for SA
Vukuzenzele Unnamed
President Cyril Ramaphosa recently announced in his 2022 State of the Nation Address (SONA) that government plans to scrap the National State of Disaster as the coun try enters a new phase in the management of the Coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic.
“It is our intention to end the National State of Disaster as soon as we have finalised other measures under the National Health Act and other legislation to contain the pandemic,” said the President.
On 15 March 2020, President Ramaphosa declared the National State of Disaster in terms of the Disaster Management Act and announced a range of measures to contain the COVID-19 outbreak.
President Ramaphosa said nearly all restrictions on economic and social activity have already been lifted, which is largely thanks to the vaccination rollout programme.
He reminded citizens that vaccines are the best defence against illness, death and COVID-19, which has claimed close to 100 000 lives locally.
“I've always said from a personal point of view, had I have not been vaccinated, in December when I contracted COVID-19, I probably will not be standing here,” he reflected.
The President took the time to urge South Africans to take the life-saving jab and continue to observe basic health measures and remain vigilant.
“We will be able to get on with our lives, even with the virus in our midst,” he said, adding that the pandemic has exacerbated the divide between those who are employed and those who are jobless.
Solidarity Fund
President Ramaphosa announced that the Solidarity Fund has raised R3.4 billion from more than 300 000 South Africans and companies, while more than 400 individuals and 100 companies volunteered their time and services.
“The fund has played a pivotal role in supporting the national health response and alleviating the humanitarian crisis that confronted our country and our people.”He thanked everyone who contributed to the fund, including some Members of Parliament, and other initiatives to support those affected by the pandemic.
The President also paid tribute to the many healthcare and frontline workers who play a key role in the fight against COVID-19.
“The nation owes a great debt of gratitude to the dedicated health workers and to other frontline staff who put their own health and lives at risk to care for the ill and the vulnerable during this period,” he said.
– SAnews.gov.za
Public and private sector key to economic growth
Vukuzenzele Unnamed
As we work to grow our economy and create employment, there is much debate about the relative roles of the state and business in pursuing these goals.
Some people have suggested that we must make a choice between, on the one hand, a developmental state that plays a vital role in economic and social transformation, and, on the other, a vibrant, expanding private sector that drives growth and employment.
The reality is that we need both.
We need a capable developmental state and a dynamic and agile private sector.
We need them to work together and complement each other.
This idea is not new.
Thirty years ago, in 1992, the African National Congress adopted a document titled “Ready to Govern”.
The document set out policy guidelines for a democratic South Africa and has, over nearly three decades, influenced the policy direction of successive democratic administrations.
The “Ready to Govern” document envisaged a democratic state with ultimate responsibility for coordinating, planning and guiding the development of the economy towards a sustainable growth pattern’ in cooperation with the trade union movement, business and other organs of society.
It spoke of the need for economic policy that democratises the economy and creates productive employment opportunities at a living wage for all South Africans.
The document further envisages a dynamic private sector, employing the skills and acumen of all South Africans … and of business activities which contribute significantly to job creation, being actively encouraged.
In the recent State of the Nation Address, I outlined how government, business and labour should work together, each using their unique capabilities, to create jobs.
One of the most important drivers of growth and employment are stateowned enterprises (SOEs).
They generate electricity, manage the ports, build the roads and supply the water that the economy needs to function.
Since the advent of democracy, these SOEs have significantly expanded access to basic services for the poor.
That is why a critical part of our programme is to strengthen state-owned enterprises, restoring them to financial health, improving their operational performance and enabling them to play a more prominent and beneficial role in the economy.
True to the role envisaged in "Ready to Govern", the state directs both growth and transformation through levers like competition policy, broad-based black economic empowerment provisions and employment equity laws, and by linking the award of various licences to universal service and empowerment obligations.
Government is also directly involved in employment creation beyond those people employed in the public service.
The Expanded Public Works Programme, which has been in existence since 2003, has provided work opportunities to millions of people.
More recently, in response to the devastating economic impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, this government has overseen the most significant expansion of public employment in our country’s history.
The Presidential Employment Stimulus has supported more than 850 000 opportunities in just 16 months.
In addition to expanding public employment, we are providing support to unemployed young people to prepare them for work, make them more employable and connect them to opportunities.
There are many other ways in which government is contributing directly to job creation, including through large-scale investments in infrastructure, the establishment of special economic zones and through support to labour-intensive growth industries.
A special focus this year is on small, medium and micro businesses, on cooperatives and the informal sector.
Through the redesign of the loan guarantee scheme that we introduced in the early months of the COVID-19 pandemic, we are making ‘bounce back’ finance more accessible for small businesses.
We are expanding the employment tax incentive and looking at various other regulatory changes to make it easier for small businesses to employ more people.
As I indicated in the State of the Nation Address, these are among the measures we are taking as government to create the conditions that will enable the private sector – both big and small – to emerge, to grow, to access new markets, to create new products, and to hire more employees.
The private sector employs some three quarters of South Africa’s workers and accounts for over two-thirds of investment and research and development expenditure.
Alongside a capable and developmental state, our country therefore needs a thriving private sector that is investing in productive capacity.
As private sector employment expands, more livelihoods are supported and sustained.
Goods and services are delivered at a greater scale and the democratic state is able to collect more revenue for social development.
The “Ready to Govern” document says that the role of the state should be adjusted to the needs of the national economy in a flexible way, whether it is increasing the public sector in strategic areas or reducing it in others.
We will not achieve such an economy without both a strong and capable developmental state and an inclusive, fast-growing private sector.
We should not be asked to choose one or the other.
We need both.
Let us work together to fix our finances
vukuzenzele unnamed
The Budget present-ed by Finance Min-ister Tito Mboweni presents a sobering assessment of the state of our economy.
The figures make it plain that unless we act now to turn things around, there will be even more difficult times ahead.Put simply, we are spending far more than we are earning.
As a result, we are borrowing more and more, and the cost of servicing that debt is rising.
In fact, debt service costs are now the fastest-growing area of expenditure.
We spend more on debt repayments than we do on health; only education and social devel-opment get more.This position is precarious and unsustainable.We need to make significant changes and we need to make them now.There are several reasons for the position we’re now in.
Our economy has not grown much over the last decade, mainly due to the 2008 global financial crisis and a decline in demand for the minerals that we export.
As a result, reve-nue collection has been weak and we have had to borrow more to sustain spending on development, infrastructure and wages.
At the same time, state capture and corruption has affected governance, operational effectiveness and financial sustainability at several public institutions, including state-owned enter-prises (SOEs).Efforts over the last two years to revive the economy and rebuild institutions have now been undermined by the electricity crisis, further constraining growth and placing an additional burden on public finances.Our priorities in this budget therefore are to put the econo-my back on a path of growth, constrain public spending and stabilise our debt.The budget is an integral part of our drive for inclusive growth, job creation, invest-ment and a capable state.We have made a deliberate decision not to pursue a path of austerity.
Such a route would have seen deep cuts in spending on the social servic-es that poor people rely on.
It could have involved dramat-ically reducing the salaries of civil servants, the size of the public service, cutting bonus-es and pensions, raising taxes and selling off key state assets.An austerity budget would have damaged our growth prospects further and weak-ened the ability of the state to stimulate economic activity and meet people’s needs.We have instead presented a budget that contains a range of balanced and well-con-sidered measures to contain spending, increase revenue and encourage growth.Over the next three years, we expect to achieve savings of around R261 billion by cutting the budgets of several depart-ments and reducing the rate at which the public service wage bill increases.
At the same time, however, we will need to spend more to support the restructuring of SOEs like Eskom and SAA.
As a result, we expect a net reduction of R156 billion in non-interest spending over the medium term.This will help to narrow the deficit and reduce our bor-rowing needs.A large part of the savings will come from reducing the rate at which our wage bill grows.
This will require fo-cused discussions among all social partners, but particular-ly with public sector unions.
These engagements need to be conducted in a spirit of seeking solutions.
I am heart-ened by the willingness of all parties to engage in serious negotiations aimed at finding a solution.Our approach is not to dra-matically cut the size of the public service, but to examine the rate at which wages grow.
Public service wages have on average increased at a much higher rate than inflation over many years, and we need to fix this if we are to get public finances under control.
This also applies to the manage-ment of people’s personal finances, where if any ex-penditure item that rises at a rate more than inflation – be it electricity tariffs, mobile tariffs or food – will always put any individual person’s budget and finances under strain and out of kilter.The wage bill remains the largest component of spend-ing by economic classification.
Growth in the wage bill has begun crowding out spending on capital projects for future growth and items that are critical for service delivery.The public service wage bill is by no means the only area where we are cutting costs.
I have decided that there will be no increase in the salaries of senior public office bearers this year.
This follows a re-duction in benefits stemming from changes to the Min-isterial Handbook.
We will publish a new law this year introducing a remuneration framework for public entities and state owned companies to prevent excessive pay for board members and execu-tives.Our trade union compatri-ots are right in saying that we should in a demonstrable way prevent leakages of public funds by addressing corruption, ending irregu-lar, fruitless and wasteful expenditure.
We will do this and much more.As much as containing the public wage bill is critical to stabilising public finances, improving public sector per-formance is imperative if we want to build a more capable, efficient state.
We need more of the right people in the right positions.As we contain public spend-ing, we are pursuing growth.
It is for this reason that, despite the fiscal gap, there are no major tax increases.
Instead, there is some relief for individual tax payers and several measures to broaden the corporate tax base.
We are also pushing ahead with far-reaching reforms in areas like electricity provision, ports and rail and telecommu-nications to reduce the cost of doing business.
Through the Infrastructure Fund we aim to mobilise financing from a range of sources to invest in a massive build programme.
Through our industrial strat-egy and investment drive we are unlocking vital areas of growth.We are fixing our public finances to make inclusive growth and job creation pos-sible.
Such times call for us to be realistic, not dogmatic.
They call for cooperation, not conflict.
Compromises and trade-offs will have to be made.We are all in this together, and we share a collective re-sponsibility to take the oars, to row in unison and steer our country through these stormy waters.
Patient support crucial for fighting TB
Dale Hes
The USAID Tubercu-losis South Africa Project is proving to be a perfect example of how government, com-munities and NGOs can partner together to combat tuberculosis (TB) by pro-viding proper support to patients.
South Africa has taken a position of leadership in the global fight against TB, and the United States Agency for International Development (USAID) has stepped in to provide assistance.
The five-year project, which started in 2016, is being car-ried out in partnership with the National Department of Health in eight of South Africa’s provinces.
One of the most important parts of the project is to support community-based NGOs.
The project provides funding to 21 NGOs who have supported more than 3 500 patients, the majority based in rural areas.
Free State progressBased in Mangaung, Mosa-moria is one of the NGOs which has received funding from the project.
The organi-sation has a team of commu-nity health workers, a project manager and a data capturer who all work towards en-suring that patients stay on treatment so that they can be cured in a six month period.
“We employ 74 care givers for this project.
Initially we worked with 200 patients, then 400 patients, and in our current contract we have 500 patients who we work with on a daily basis.
The patients are referred to us when they have been diagnosed as having TB from nine differ-ent clinics in the Mangaung Metro,” says Mosamaria coordinator Trudie Harrison.
Mosamaria conducts monthly door-to-door screening campaigns to find new TB patients and get them on treatment immediately.Harrison says that Mosa-moria’s work has reduced the stigma around TB, built close relationships with the community and also led to much better rates of success-ful treatment.“For example, in 2018, 514 of our patients were cured,” Harrison says.
Harrison shares the story of one of Mosamaria’s patients.
He was given daily support by a Mosamaria caregiver, who ensured that he swal-lowed his tablets every day and also assisted with maize meal and new clothes.
“He completed the treat-ment and was cured.
He went back to work as his employer had kept his job for him,” says Harrison.Know the symptoms of TB If you have some of the fol-lowing symptoms, then you should visit your nearest clinic or hospital to be tested for TB:
• Coughing that lasts three or more weeks;
• Coughing up blood;
• Chest pain, or pain when breathing or coughing;
• Unintentional weight loss;
• Fatigue;
• Fever.HEALTHFor more information about the USAID TB South Africa Project, contact 012 484 9300.
Vulekamali empowers South Africans
More Matshediso
With a click of a button, people are able to easily get to grips with the country’s budg-ets, thanks to an online system called Vulekamali.The portal was established two years ago by National Treasury in collaboration with a number of civil society organ-isations.
This innovative project won an award during the 17th Pub-lic Sector Innovation Awards 2019, under the Innovations Harnessing 4IR Solutions cat-egory.
National Treasury Director Andile Best, who leads the Vulekamali portal initiative, says its main aim is to increase public interest, participation and knowledge of govern-ment’s financial programmes.“This is National Treasury’s commitment to be more trans-parent about public finances.
Budgetary information is already published on Treas-ury’s website, but the portal contains easily accessible data in a user-friendly format, to enable more effective infor-mation sharing, analyses and research,” he explaines.
According to Best, Vulekamali supports involvement by civil society and the public in budget processes and enables citizens to have informed discussions about government policies.“If we ask the public to partic-ipate in budgetary processes and they come from a position of not knowing, they cannot make quality inputs.
Secondly, we want the public to know how government spends mon-ey from the public purse,” Best says.
For example, civil society organisations often want to know how government renders services, how services are connected to the budget and whether national, provincial or local government is responsible for specific services.Best says amongst the stake-holders involved in the project are the Department of Plan-ning, Monitoring and Evalu-ation; civil society coalition Imali Yethu; Global Initiative and the Government Technical Advisory Centre.
At every level of decision making and on each govern-ance structure, there is rep-resentation of both government and civil society, he says.Speaking on behalf of the civil society organisations involved, Zukiswa Kota, the head of the Monitoring and Advocacy Pro-gramme at the Public Service Accountability Mon-itor and lead co-ordinator of Imali Yethu, says accountable budgetary processes are critical to a democracy.
The ultimate goal is to influence better ser-vice delivery, she says.“For us, access to quicker information means that you do not constantly have com-munities upset and unaware of budget processes,” she says, adding that people have a better sense of the urgency required in commenting on budgets and they know who to speak to about their frustrations.More MatshedisoRhino poaching in South Africa has declined from 768 rhino killed for their horn in 2018 to 594 in 2019.
This is according to Minister of Environment, Forestry and Fisheries Barbara Creecy.
She says the decrease is the re-sult of additional steps taken by government to curb poaching and paid tribute to the rangers who work tirelessly each day to stop poachers.Anti-poaching measures implemented by government include improved capabilities to react to poaching incidents through better situational awareness and use of tech-nology, improved information collection and sharing amongst law enforcement authorities, better regional and national co-operation and more mean-ingful involvement of the pri-vate sector, non-governmental organisations and donors.“A decline in poaching for five consecutive years is a reflection of the diligent work of the men and women who put their lives on the line daily to combat rhino poaching, often coming into direct contact with ruthless poachers,” says the minister.
She says that steps to address rhino poaching and wildlife crime across the country are aligned with the Integrated Strategic Management of Rhinoceros plan and with the principles set out in the draft National Integrated Strategy to Combat Wildlife Trafficking (NISCWT), which will be taken to Cabinet for consideration in the first half of this year.
The NISCWT aims to strengthen the law enforcement aspects of the Integrated Strate-gic Management of Rhinoceros plan and broadens the scope to combat other wildlife traffick-ing, not only rhino poaching.With regard to elephant poaching, the department says 31 elephant were poached in South Africa in 2019, of which 30 were from the Kruger Na-tional Park and one was from Mapungubwe National Park.
This is a far cry from the 71 poached in 2018.From January to December 2019, 178 suspected poachers were arrested in the Kruger National Park.
Nationally, 332 suspects were arrested for rhino poaching and rhino horn trafficking.
Be switched on and switch off
Silusapho Nyanda
THERE ARE VARIOUS things that South Africans can do to save electricity and avoid load-shedding.
A MPUMALANGA emerging farmer is ploughing ahead, having already won a prestigious award and secured a substantial contract for her maize.
A young female maize farmer is taking giant leaps towards becoming a successful commercial farmer.
Njabulo Mbokane (24), the owner of a 200-hectare non-genetically modified organism yellow maize farm, was recently named the South African Breweries (SAB) and FarmSol Young Emerging Farmer of the Year.
The Ermelo-based farmer leases two farms; one in her hometown; where she grows crops, and the other in Lothair; where she raises sheep.Despite only starting farming in 2016, Mbokane already has a year-on-year maize contract with SAB.She is part of the FarmSol programme, which is an SAB Thrive Fund initiative aimed at funding Agri-SMMEs; providing technical training and support to emerging farmers; giving access to modern production inputs and patient financing to qualifying enterprises and enabling emerging farmers to find a route to market for their produce.“FarmSol mentors us and helps us with training.
It also assists us in taking samples of the maize and soil.” Mbokane was financially unable to study further after matric but knew that agriculture held many opportunities for people with the will to work hard.“I started farming because I saw a gap that young people should explore and I went for it.”Mbokane employs three permanent staff members and hires 15 seasonal employees during peak periods.
She is looking to expand her operations to include cattle and vegetables once she has secured her own land and farming equipment.Having her own tractors, for instance, will enable her to plant on time whereas with hired equipment, she can only plant when the tractor owner has finished his planting.Mbokane started the farm with her mother’s pension payout and said that young people need not wait for a big break before making a start on their farming dream.
“Start with the little that you have, even if it’s the garden in your backyard, and grow from there,” she said.Be switched on and switch offThe ups and downs of farmingSilusapho NyandaThe Acting Station Manager of Eskom’s Matimba Power Station Obakeng Mabotja says the lack of sufficient power in South Af-rica impacts people’s lives be-cause normal activities cannot happen during load-shedding.Matimba Power Station is sit-uated in Lephalale, Limpopo.Mabotja explained that load-shedding occurs when Eskom is unable to produce enough electricity to meet the country’s demand.
It is there-fore essential that all South Africans do their bit to use less power.
Tips to use less electricity:
• Switch off lights when leaving a room• Use LED bulbs• Turn off appliances when they are not in use• Only use cold water, un-less necessary• Use a thermal blanket to cover your geyser.Several factors can hamper power production, including maintenance, unplanned shutdowns and, critically, the weather.
Mabotja said that her Matim-ba, in particular, is affected by high weather temperatures.
“On very hot days, the station is unable to produce power to its full capacity,” she said.The Matimba Power Station uses coal to produce electricity, and it is designed to generate 3990 MW.
“Power is distributed via a distribution substation.
It travels along high-voltage transmission lines and pass-es through step-down transformers to lower the voltage.
Electricity is then transmitted to the national grid.”The power station’s coal comes from Exxaro’s Grootege-luk mine.
It is transported via a conveyor system to Matimba’s silos and bunkers, before going to the mills where it is crushed and converted into electricity, said Mabotja.
Building a nation that cares for children
vukuzenzele unnamed
There is a proverb common to many African cultures which says that it takes a village to raise a child.
This idea – that the broader community has a responsibility for the development, well-being and safety of each child – comes to mind when I think about the tragic and deeply upsetting death of 13-year-old Enock Mpianzi on a school camp recently.
Sadly, Enock is not the only child to lose his life for reasons that were entirely preventable, if only adults had exercised due care and responsibility.
One thinks of another 13-year-old, Keamohetswe Shaun Seboko, who recently drowned in the swimming pool of a Magaliesburg primary school, and the two children who died at the Lekgolo Primary School in Limpopo when a truck crashed into a wall that collapsed on them.
One thinks also about the many children, like 6-year-old Nathlia Pienaar, who are killed in the crossfire of gang wars on the Cape Flats.
We remember also the tragic deaths of Michael Komape and Lumka Mkethwa, both of whom died after falling into pit latrines.
All of those young lives, and the lives of many others, need never have been lost.
All these tragedies could have been prevented if measures had been taken to keep these children out of harm’s way.
It seems to me that, as a society, we are failing our children.
Too many children find themselves in dangerous situations, whether it is on a make shift raft on a river or being left alone in a shack with a paraffin lamp.
When contractors leave excavations unprotected or school infrastructure is not maintained or school transport is overcrowded, the lives of children are put at risk.
But there is more than negligence and neglect at work.
Many children are targeted by sexual predators, criminal gangs and drug sellers precisely because they are vulnerable.
As a society, we need to be more diligent and more active in protecting our children from these and other dangers.
As a society, we need to build a culture of responsibility.
We need to be responsible for ourselves, for our children and for others.
Just as we need to ensure that children are able to grow up in a safe, nurturing and stimulating environment, so too must we feel a duty to protect and care for all those who we know and interact with.
We must feel this duty of care on the road.
While we welcome the drop in road fatalities over this festive season, the grim reality is that over 1,600 people died on our roads in just a month and a half.
It is disturbing that over 9,000 motorists were arrested for offences including drunk driving, speeding, and reckless and negligent driving.
A culture of responsibility means that we should all drive safely and respect the rights of pedestrians and other road users.
A culture of responsibility means that fathers need to be present in the lives of their children.
Too many women have to raise children on their own, which often limits their prospects and those of their children.
A culture of responsibility also means that we should practice safe sex and not expose ourselves or others to HIV .
We should not abuse alcohol or use drugs.
We should seek to live healthy lives so that we avoid diseases that are largely preventable and live longer lives.
Such a culture should be embraced in particular by all those in society who occupy positions of authority and influence, whether they are religious leaders or politicians, traditional leaders or celebrities.
Through their words and actions, they should seek to build a better society in which all are appreciated and cared for.
Elected officials and public servants are entrusted with the responsibility to ensure the safety and well-being of citizens.
They must ensure that there is adequate and safe infrastructure in schools.
They must act quickly when there is an interruption to water supply in a communities or when faulty streetlights are reported.
They must ensure that health and safety regulations are enforced and that the rule of law is maintained.
In addition to the ongoing work that is taking place across government, at all levels, to give effect to this responsibility, we have sometimes had to take extraordinary measures.
In response to the deaths and injury caused by children falling into pit latrines, we launched the SAFE initiative to accelerate the provision of appropriate toilets to all schools in the country.
We deployed the South African National Defence Force to parts of Cape Town to support the police in their efforts to reduce gang violence.
More recently, we have, together with civil society, embarked on an emergency response plan to end violence against women and children.
Yet, there is clearly much more that we need to do, as government and as a society.
We applaud those individuals and organisations who have taken upon themselves responsibility for the well-being of others.
There are people like Ralph Bouwers and Mark Nicholson, who organise recreation activities for young people in Lavender Hill in Cape Town to keep them from turning to gangsterism.
There are the mothers, sisters and daughters who work as student volunteers with Operation Bobbi Bear, an organisation in Amanzimtoti in KwaZulu-Natal that offers shelter to young children who have been abused.
There are many faith-based groups like the Southern African Catholic Bishops’ Confer ence, who I met recently who told me about the work they are doing to respond to the needs of the poor, to support families to be more caring and nurturing and to assist young people in confronting the many challenges before them.
These South Africans are showing us the way.
Through their example, they are reminding us of what it means to take responsibility for ourselves and for others.
This country has witnessed far too many tragedies.
Too many young lives have been lost, too many children hurt and traumatised.
We can bring these tragedies to an end if we all, each one of us, take responsibility for raising the children in our great South African village.
The ins and outs of ADHD and ADD
Silusapho Nyanda
THERE IS HELP available for children who suffer from attention deficit and hyperactivity disorders.
THE BRAINS OF PRESCHOOL children grow at an incredible rate and help lay the foundations of language, thinking and social and emotional development.
Children from Upington in the Northern Cape are benefiting from 10 early childhood development (ECDs) centres recently launched by the Department of Social Develop ment (DSD).
Five-year-old Lithemba Bacela, who lives with cerebral palsy and has a speech impairment, is better able to indicate what she feels and needs, thanks to her time at one of these centres, Oasis Skills Development Centre’s ECD unit.
Lithemba lives in Paballelo with her mother, Elizabeth Bacela, who says her child’s communication skills have improved since she started at the centre last year.
Elizabeth said the stimulation area has been particularly beneficial.“Lithemba can now indicate when she is thirsty, hungry or has wet herself.”The Oasis ECD centre is one of 10 that received new buildings from the National Lotteries Commission (NLC) as part of the commission’s Legacy Project.
This countrywide initiative is aligned with the National Development Plan’s commitment to improving education, innovation and training, and ensuring that all children have at least two years of preschool education.The centre accommodates children who live with a variety of conditions, including autism, down syndrome, cerebral palsy and foetal alcohol syndrome.
Each of the four classes at the ECD centre has 10 to 15 pupils, says Acting Chairperson of Oasis Skills Development Centre Marina Johannesen.The department contributes a subsidy of R20 per child, which covers children between the ages of two and seven and those who are 18 years of age and above.
In 2015, the DSD donated a stimulation centre, computer lab and a bus to transport pupils to and from school.“Once a week, therapists from the local hospital come to the centre to assess and treat the children,”says Johannesen.
The new building, donated recently is an additional blessing for the centre.
Speaking at the launch, Social Development Deputy Minister Hendrietta Bogopane-Zulu called on the public to include children living with disabilities in dialogues about issues that affect them.Silusapho NyandaIf a child who suffers from attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) or attention deficit disorder (ADD) is not treated, the conditions could have long-term negative impacts on their health.
This is according to Dr Khatija Jhazbhay, who heads up the Child and Adolescent Psychiatry Unit at Townhill Hospital in Pietermaritzburg, KwaZulu-Natal.
She explained that as adults, these children could be at an increased risk of other mental conditions, such as anxiety and depression, and could also mis-use substances.
ADHD and ADD affect chil-dren’s academic progress and their behaviour could annoy others.
Children could also be disliked, get into trouble and be prone to accidents.
“Each child’s circumstances are unique and developing, so it’s important to do a com-prehensive clinical assessment to recognise other factors that could be impacting their development, as well as the strengths that can be built on to assist them to reach their full potential,” said Dr Jhazbhay.She explained that ADHD and ADD are neurodevelopmental disorders that present with behavioural difficulties, such as inattention.
This shows in the form of:
• making careless mistakes• not completing tasks• losing things• being easily distracted and forgetful Examples of hyperac-tivity or impulsiveness include:
• fidgeting• tapping hands or feet• squirming in their seat• blurting out answers and getting up when expected to remain seated.“Symptoms present in two or more settings – at home, school, with friends or relatives or dur-ing other activities – and inter-fere with social, occupational or school functioning.
Severe symptoms present before the age of 12 and must be present for at least six months.
Teachers are able to pick up behaviour difficulties and can refer a child for clinical assess-ment.
There are treatment op-tions that can be considered.
Land claim reaps rewards
Hlengiwe Ngobese
The first blackowned private game reserve is on the cards for KZN, thanks to a R15 million government investment to the Mayibuye Community Trust.
The word mayibuye, which means to return in isiZulu, is also the name of the 5 581-hectare Mayibuye Game Reserve, which is located between Pietermaritzburg and Durban.
The land being returned to the community was taken via forced removals in 1963, which saw 445 people lose their homes.
Chairperson of the reserve, Welcome Maphanga said the community was relocated to
Madiba shapes another life
Allison Cooper
Struggle icon former President Nelson Mandela said, “Edu cation is the great engine of personal development.
It is through education that the daughter of a peasant can become a doctor, the son of a mine worker can become head of the mine and the child of a farm worker can become the president of a great nation”.
Dr Buntu Godongwana (35), one of eight students to receive an inaugural MRF scholarship in 2005, is proof of this.
“Our progression from hum ble beginnings in Guguletu, Cape Town, to sharing ideas on international platforms, with world leaders in our discipline, is living testimony of Madiba’s words,” he said.
Dr Godongwana, now a lecturer at the Department of Chemical Engineering at the Cape Peninsula University of Technology (CPUT), said the scholarship is a special award.
“Being selected in the inaugural cohort will always be a highlight of my aca-demic career.
It’s more than a monetary award, it served as affirmation of our values and recognition of our leadership potential.
“It came with the responsibility of setting the tone and benchmark for future scholars; living the principles of leadership, as embodied by patron Mandela; and giving substance and form to his vision of building exceptional leadership capacity in Africa.
I was truly humbled and honoured to be a part of this great vision.”Born in Guguletu in 1983, Dr Godong-wana matriculated from Fezeka Senior Secondary School as the best academic achiever in 2000.
He completed his under graduate studies in Chemical Engineering in 2004 and, along with being awarded the scholarship, was named the Learning Cape Festival Icon by the Western Cape
A ray of hope for Khayelitsha girls
Allison Cooper
Plagued by escalat ing crime, poverty and inequality, it was tough to find good education for girls in a safe environment in the Khayelitsha township.
This is no longer the case as Molo Mhlaba is steadily closing the gap by offering quality education that can set girls up for life.
Headed up by Dr Rethabile Sonibare, Molo Mhlaba – which means 'hello' world in English opened its doors with a mere handful of learn ers aged between three and six in January 2018.
A short ten months later, it has 38 foundation phase learners in its charge.Inspired by the Montessori approach and a fun, playful and creative environment, the school provides quality science, technology, engi neering, art and design and maths (STEAM) education, through innovative teaching and learning strategies, by teachers from the commu nity.
It is a dual English and Xhosa medium school.“As a STEAM school, we offer subjects such as robot ics and coding to three and four year olds,” Dr Sonibare confirmed.
In an area where sexual abuse is one of the biggest social ills, Molo Mhlaba provides a safe haven and
2018 Central Application Clearing House (CACH)
vukuzenzele unnamed
What is the Central Application Clearing House?
The Central Application Clearing House (CACH) was created by the Department of Higher Education and Training to assist prospective students who want to enter the Post-School Education and Training (PSET) System but might be facing a situation whereby they:
Applied on time to their institution of choice but their application was declined and now it is too late to apply elsewhere.
Did not apply because they did not meet the entry requirement based on their Grade 11 results but find that their Grade 12 results meet the entry requirements.
Did not apply on time for one reason or the other or did not apply at all.
Have no clue what to study after completing matric.
Have an idea what to study but are not sure if their choice of study is right for them.
Services offered by CACH
Applications for PSET learning opportunities (universities, universities of Technology, technical and vocational education and training colleges
and Sector Education and Training Authorities.
Information about financial aid.
Career development services (guidance, information, advice and
career planning/information on funding and financing options).
Artisan support (National Artisan Development Support Centre).
The CACH service starts on 3 January 2018, shortly before the NSC examination results are released, and will operate until the end of
February 2018.
How does CACH work?
Phase 1: Students who have not received an offer of a space by the institutions they have applied for, or who are looking for PSET learning opportunities, can contact CACH via a toll free number (call 0800 356 635), the website (www.dhet.gov.
za) or via a standard SMS (SMS name and ID to 49200) or they can register online.
You can also find out more
on their via Facebook page which is
(CACH_SA)
Phase 2: The agents will call a prospective student back free of charge, from the contact centre and register all requested details on the CACH database, indicating the learner’s chosen field of study and the province they wish to study in.
Phase 3: The applicant’s personal details and matric results will be verified and automatically transferred to institutions of higher learning for possible admission and placement.
Phase 4: The CACH service will verify
the learner’s information and forward it to institutions that still have available places.
Where places exist and applicants meet the requirements, institutions will contact applicants directly to offer them available places.
Points to note
CACH cannot guarantee any applicant a space to study.
CACH cannot determine when the institutions will contact the applicant for possible placement.
How does CACH assist applicants who are not sure of what to study or those who do not meet the requirements to enter the PSET system?
The CACH service works in collaboration with the National Career Development Services (CDS) which assists in providing comprehensive career information and advice on:
Careers & learning pathways
Subject choice.
Information on supplementary exams
Matric upgrades.
Study opportunities offered by the PSET system.
Funding and financing options
Information on applications processes and closing dates.
Second semester application and registration dates.
Anyone who is interested in the services offered by CDS may contact the CDS
Helpline through the following channels:
SMS your question or send a ‘please call me’ to 072 204 5056, or
Call 086 999 0123, which is a call share line, from Monday to Friday between 8:00am and 4:30pm,
Email careerhelp@dhet.gov.za,
Visit the office of the CDS at 123 Francis Baard Street, Pretoria,
Facebook at www.facebook.com/ careerhelp, or
Twitter at www.twitter.com/ rsacareerhelp
Government funding opportunities?
There are different funding opportunities available for studies at higher institutions of learning.
These are offered by: Funza Lushaka Bursary Scheme, National Student Financial Aid Scheme, the Rural Education Access Programme, Department of Social Development, Department of Science and Technology and Department of Health.
Who should apply for the financial aid?
South African learners who would like to study at higher institutions of learning are invited to visit the Financial Aid Office at the institution of their choice.
NA
More Matshediso
More than nine million learners across South African public schools are tuck- ing into their school work thanks to a government pro- gramme that ensures their bellies are full of nutritious food.
Through the National School Nutrition Programme (NSNP) the Department of Basic Education (DBE) has exceeded its goal of providing meals to about 75 percent of the country’s learners.
NSNP director Neo Rakwena
said 20 619 schools prepare and serve school meals to approximately 9 032 622 learners across the country each day.
“Many children come from poor households that struggle to put food on the table, and for some learners, the school meal is the only meal they have in a day.
School meals contribute to learning capacity, concentration and class participation,” she said.
She said schools that have
been excluded from the pro- gramme should approach district offices if they want to come on board.
In the 2015/16 financial year, about R5 703 billion was allo- cated to the programme.
Rakwena said the amount spent on the programme is adjusted annually to cover inflation, and the budget for 2017/18 is around R6.4 billion.
The programme intends to
alleviate short-term hunger and contribute to the well-be-ing of learners.
School enrolment and learner attendance are also improving as a result of the feeding pro- gramme.
Recently, Cabinet approved the publication of the Report on the Evaluation of the NSNP compiled by the Department of Planning, Monitoring and Evaluation (DPME).
It outlines successes and steps that can be taken to improve the initiative.
DPME Director for Evalua- tion Jabu Mathe, said the main aim of the evaluation was to assess whether the NSNP is being implemented in a way that is likely to result in sig- nificant health and education benefits for learners.
He reiterated that the overall
aim of the programme is to improve the health and nu- tritional status of the poorest learners in South Africa.
The programme targets all learn- ers in quintile 1 to 3 public schools, which equates to 60 percent of the poorest schools in South Africa.
The programme also helps
with alleviating poverty in communities through job creation.
“The evaluation found that
the NSNP provides opportu- nities to over 50 000 voluntary food handlers annually to cook for learners, and they earn a stipend of R960 per month,” said Mathe.
“This translates to R576 mil- lion a year in stipends which benefit community members.” The programme also stim- ulates economic activity as small, medium and micro-en- terprises and co-operatives benefit as service providers in those provinces with decentralised procurement (KwaZulu-Natal, Gauteng, Mpumalanga and the North- ern Cape).
“Local sourcing of vegetables
has the potential to benefit schools and communities and stimulate local agriculture.” The report also revealed that the Western Cape, Mpuma- langa, Gauteng, Eastern Cape, Northern Cape and North West provinces have best implemented the programme over the years.
Ectopic pregnancy is a medical emergency
Allison Cooper
The medical compli-cations of ectopic pregnancies bring much heartache to expect-ing mothers.This is according to Dr Bushy Mhlari, the Senior Registrar Ectopic Obstet-rics and Gynaecology at Dr George Mukhari Academic Hospital.“In ectopic pregnancies, the fertilised egg implants on other body surfaces.
In 98 per-cent of cases, the location of ectopic pregnancies is in the fallopian tubes.
Uncommon locations include the ovary, abdominal cavity, cervix and the broad ligament,” said Dr Mhlari.When this happens, the em-bryo cannot be transplanted and ending the pregnancy is the woman’s only option.
He explained that an ectop-ic pregnancy is not located in the cavity of the uterus, where a pregnancy is nor-mally located.
Adding that normally, after fertilisation of the egg by the sperm which occurs inside the fallopian tube, the fertil-ised egg travels through the tube to the rich uterine cavity where it attaches to the endo-metrial lining and the baby develops.
Dr Mhlari said a woman has a higher chance of an ectopic pregnancy if she has;
• damaged or abnormal fallopian tubes, such as from past tubal in-fections from sexually transmitted infections or tubal surgery; • had a previous ectopic pregnancy; • has infertility; • has multiple sexual partners; • smokes cigarettes.“Ruptured ectopic preg-nancy is a life-threatening condition and is the leading cause of pregnancy-related maternal death in the first three months of pregnancy.
The incidence of ectopic pregnancy is approximately two percent in the general population,” said Dr Mhlari.
Signs of an ectopic pregnancyAccording to Dr Mhlari, the symptoms appear early in pregnancy.
Sometimes, even before the woman re-alises that she is pregnant.
Common symptoms include;
• lower abdominal pain, • a missed menstrual pe-riod; • vaginal bleeding.“However, some women have no symptoms until the fallopian tube ruptures.
When this happens, the woman may experience severe pain and some may have vaginal bleeding.
This is followed by dizziness, a drop in blood pressure, fainting, shock and death if treatment is delayed,” he said.To diagnose an ectopic preg-nancy, a blood or urine preg-nancy test is done to confirm that the woman is pregnant.
“An ultrasound is then done to confirm if the uterus is empty and to see where the embryo is in the woman’s body,” said Dr Mhlari.
Treating an ectopic pregnancy“Once an ectopic pregnancy is diagnosed it must be treated to stop its growth, because the woman’s life is at risk if treatment is delayed,” said Dr Mhlari.“Surgery remains the first choice treatment of an ectop-ic pregnancy however, early diagnosis allows the option of medical treatment before the ectopic pregnancy ruptures,” he added.Dr Mhlari said that a wom-an can still conceive after an ectopic pregnancy.
Women who suspect that they have an ectopic pregnan-cy must consult their general practitioner, local hospital or clinic as soon as possible.
Spot childhood cancer warning signs
Allison Cooper
Childhood cancer is on the rise globally, with an esti mated one in 408 children worldwide diagnosed with cancer before the age of 15.
According to Taryn See-gers, the Communications Coordinator at the Child-hood Cancer Foundation of South Africa (CHOC), it is believed that two thirds of children with cancer do not receive treatment and often those who do are already in the late stages of the disease.Since 2011, CHOC has been working with the Department of Health and traditional healers to provide health professio-nals, healthcare workers, traditional healers and com-munities with knowledge of childhood cancer.
“These individuals are taught the Siluan early war-ning signs and learn how to demystify myths and stigma in communities,” says Seegers.The Siluan early warning signs are:
• Seek: Medical help for early, persistent symp-toms.• Eye: White spot in the eye, new squint, new blindness, bulging eye-ball.• Lump: Abdomen and pel-vis, head and neck, limbs, testes and glands.• Unexplained: Prolonged fever over two weeks, weight loss, pallor, fatigue, easy bruising or bleeding.• Aching: Bones, joints, back and easy fractures.• Neurological signs: Change or deteriora-tion in walk, balance or speech, regression of milestones, headache for more than a week with or without vomiting and an enlarged head.Childhood cancersChildhood cancers are dif-ferent from cancers affecting adults.
They tend to occur in the organs of the body, look different under the micros-cope and respond more favourably to treatment, says Seegers.“Cure rates for most childhood cancers are much higher than those for most adult cancers.
Today, in developing countries, the majority of childhood cancers can be treated very effectively, and between 50% to 60% can be cured.
In high-income countries, the survival rate can be between 85% to 90%.”More children need to be diagnosed while the disease is still in its early stages and receive the correct treatment – at specialised treatment centres from appropriate specialists – if the survival rate is to be improved.
vFor more information, contact CHOC’s helpline at 0800 333 555 or go to www.
choc.org.zaCHILDHOOD CANCER Awareness Month, which takes place every September, creates awareness about many childhood cancers .
SA salutes whistleblowers
vukuzenzele unnamed
Over the course of the three years, since the Commission of Inquiry into State Capture started its work, we have heard of the lengths to which the perpetrators of corrupt acts have gone to conceal their misdeeds.
It has been an extremely complex undertaking to unravel the networks of influence that enabled corruption.
Among other things, vast webs of front companies were established to move funds around and disguise payments made to politically-connected individuals.The same patterns have been seen in a number of investigations into cor-ruption being undertaken by the Special Investigating Unit (SIU) the Directorate for Priority Crime Inves-tigation, the National Prosecuting Authority's (NPA) Investigating Direc-torate and others.As these investigations progressed and the net began to close on implicated individuals, we have seen witnesses being threatened, their families intimidated, being forced into hiding, and even killed.The murder of Babita Deokaran, a senior finance official in the Gauteng health department, is a stark reminder of the high stakes involved in our collective quest to remove this cancer from our society.While we do not yet know the motive for her murder, she was a key witness in a SIU investigation into the procurement of personal protective equipment in the department.The SAPS and the private security teams who appre-hended seven suspects recently are to be com-mended for their work.
The docket has been transferred to the Hawks, and the inves-tigation will yield further information on why Ms Deokaran was murdered.Regardless of the circum-stances behind this tragedy, Ms Deokaran was a hero and a patriot.
As are the legions of whistleblowers who, at great risk to them-selves, help to unearth instances of misdeeds, mal-administration, cronyism and theft.Without their brave and principled interventions, we would be unable to unmask those committing corruption.
Though much focus in recent times has been on whistleblowers in the public sector, we also owe a debt of gratitude to those in the private sector whose actions receive less attention, but are equally important.Whistleblowers are important guardians of our democracy.
They raise the alarm against unethical acts and practices in government and organisations.They speak out in good faith and with a reasonable expectation not only that action will be taken on their disclosures, but that they will be protected and not suffer victimisation or prejudice.In South Africa there is extensive legislative protection for whistleblo-wers, including through the Protected Disclosures Act, Labour Relations Act, Companies Act, Protection against Harassment Act, and the Constitution itself.In addition, the Depart-ment of Justice and Correctional Services, working with other law-enforcement agencies, administers the Office of Witness Protection to pro-vide support to vulnerable and intimidated witnesses in any judicial proceedings.Entering witness pro-tection is voluntary, and neither the SAPS nor the NPA can compel a witness to do so.
Should a witness receive threats to their life or feel unsafe, they have to inform investigators and apply for admission to the pro-gramme.
This successful programme has played a key role in securing succes-sful prosecutions since its inception, particularly with regards to organised crime.It is clear that as the fight against corruption gathers momentum, we need to urgently review our cur-rent approach not only to witness protection, but also to the broader protection of whistleblowers.While numerous systems are in place to enable whistleblowers to report anonymously, we need to tighten up existing systems and provide greater support to those who publicly come forward with information.As society, we need to identify where existing laws and policies are inadequate in protecting the livelihoods, reputations and safety of whistleblo-wers – and work together to address these.The intent of the criminals who target whistleblowers is not only to silence parti-cular individuals – it is also to send a message to other potential whistleblowers.
Day by day, brave South Africans like Babita Deo-karan are standing firm that they will not be party to corruption and they are prepared to bear witness against it.As the South African people, we salute her and all the whistleblowers in the public and private sectors who are exposing corruption to the harshest of glares.
They are doing so without expectation of acknowledgement or reward.
Theirs is the highest form of public service.We cannot let them down.
We must, and we will, ensure that their disclosures result in prosecutions and do much more to ensure that they are protected from harm.As South Africans, we want to send a strong a message that we will not be intimidated.
Those behind the killing of witnesses and whistleblowers will be arrested and face the might of the law, as will all who are found guilty of the very corruption these assassins are trying to cover up.
Cigarette ban will save lives
Silusapho Nyanda
Smokers who con tract the corona virus (COVID-19) are at risk of suffering more severe symptoms.
COVID-19 is a respiratory virus.
As such, smokers are twice as likely to suffer more serious symptoms than people who have never smoked, says Dr Catherine Egbe, a specialist scientist at the South African Medical Research Council’s Alcohol, Tobacco and Other Drug Research Unit.Dr Egbe says that smoking is known to cause many of the underlying medical conditions that have been linked to severe symptoms of COVID-19.
These include:
• cancers • heart disease and stroke • asthma• diabetes.
“Even if smoking does not directly cause a smoker to die from COVID-19, it could cause this indirectly because smokers are more likely to have the diseases that could make a person die of the virus,” she says.In addition to this, ciga-rette smoking harms nearly every organ of the body and generally reduces the body’s ability to fight diseases.
Dr Egbe says that tobacco smoking produces more than 7 000 chemicals; 250 of these chemicals have been confirmed to be toxic to the human body.
Out of these 250 chemicals, 69 are known to cause cancer.
This reduces the health of smokers as well as those exposed to second-hand smoke, Dr Egbe explains.She says that those who have TB and asthma are also high-risk patients where COVID-19 is concerned.
“So far, there is evidence to show that those who have asthma are at risk of having severe symptoms or even dying if they contract COV ID-19.
There is no study that has been published showing TB patients’ risk but the World Health Organisation has warned that it is not unlikely that persons with TB will have poor treatment outcomes if they contract COVID-19.”She says the decision to ban the sale of cigarettes under the current lockdown level is in the interests of the people.
Sale of cigarettePresident Cyril Ramapho sa had initially announced that under Level 4, cigarette sales would be allowed but government reversed the decision after the National Coronavirus Command Council consulted with medical experts and various role-players.Dr Egbe says apart from the direct health implications of smoking, cigarettes are often shared among friends which can lead to faster community transmission of COVID-19.“Remember, people are being asked to avoid touching their mouth, nose and eyes.
When a person is smoking, he or she will not be able to keep to that hygiene practice,” says Dr Egbe.In a country with a high prevalence of HIV/AIDS, TB, substance abuse and alcoholism, among others, Dr Egbe believes that government made the right call.She says government is using the data at its disposal to take precautionary meas ures to continue to protect South Africa from experiencing the scenes witnessed in countries like Italy.“It’s not a permanent ban; people must remember that,” she says.
Currently, South Africa has a limited number of ventilators and should the number of those needing ventilators spike during the pandemic, the country would find itself in a corner and not be able to help those who need aid.“We have a little over 3 000 ventilator s. Imagine if those above 65 years who are smokers, happen to need ventilators.
We will need over 10 000 ventilators only for that group alone.
That is one of the things that gov-ernment is trying to avoid.
We hope that people will see this as a good reason to quit smoking,” she says.
Did you know?
You can call The National Council Against Smoking at 011 720 3145 to assist you to quit smoking.
The Cancer Association of South Africa runs an online programme, which provides support and information for smokers who would like to stop smoking on http://www.ekickbutt.org.za.
Our democracy will help us overcome Covid-19
vukuzenzele unnamed
We often take our healthy and robust democracy for granted.
Yet it is probably our greatest asset in our momentous struggle to overcome the coronavirus pandemic.
We have among the most politically-engaged citizenry in the world.
A poll in 2018 by the Pew Research Center shows South Africans are strongly inclined to take political action about issues they feel most strongly about, such as health care, education, freedom of speech and corruption.
The poll confirms much that we already know about our-selves.
We enjoy nothing more than robust engagement with our government and among ourselves on the burning issues of the day.
We have an active civil society ever ready to safeguard our fundamental freedoms and rights.One of the triumphs of our democracy is that every South African believes the Constitu-tion protects them and that the courts are a fair and impartial arbiter of their interests.I got thinking on these mat-ters during a recent visit to the Eastern Cape to assess the province’s coronavirus state of readiness.I was asked by a journalist whether I was concerned at the pending litigation challenging certain provisions of the Disas-ter Management Act.
This law is the basis for all the regulations promulgated under the nation-al state of disaster we declared to combat coronavirus.Since the start of this crisis, a number of people have exer-cised their right to approach the courts.
The lockdown regulations were challenged in the very first week of the lock-down by a private citizen from Mpumalanga who wanted an exemption from the travel prohibition to attend a funeral.In the seven (7) weeks that have followed, there have been legal challenges from a number of individuals, religious bodies, political parties, NGOs and from business organisations against one measure or more of the lockdown provisions they were unhappy with.
Some have succeeded in their legal chal-lenges and some have not.
Some had approached the courts on the basis of the urgency of their cases had their urgency argu-ments dismissed and others have found other avenues for the relief they sought.
Others have subsequently withdrawn their applications following engagement with government.While we would prefer to avoid the need for any legal action against government, we should accept that citizens who are unhappy with whatever action that government has decided on implementing have a right to approach our courts for any form of relief they seek.
